THE CLEAR 


QURAN 


AThematic English Translation 


Dr. Mustafa Khattab 


‘Allah’ 
Edition 


THE CLEAR QURAN 
A Thematic English Translation 


Translator 
Dr. Mustafa Khattab 


Chief Editors 
Abu-Isa Webb 
Aaron Wannamaker 
Hisham Sharif 


LI 


In the Name of Allah— 


the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


© Copyright 2015, Dr. Mustafa Khattab 
All Rights Reserved. 
Email: info@mustafakhattab.org 


Translation approved by Al-Azhar (Egypt) 
and endorsed by ISNA and the Canadian Council of Imams 


Website: www.theclearquran.com 


Use the Table of Contents to navigate through this e-book. 
Click the superscripted numbers in the translation 
to access the hyperlinked endnotes. 
2K >K 2K 


QURANIC THEMES 


As pointed out in the Table of Contents and the Thematic Index, the Quran 
has three main themes: 


Doctrine (e.g., acts of worship, human interactions, family relations, and 


business transactions), which focuses mainly on a Muslim’s relationship 
with Allah, other people, and the rest of Allah’s creation. 


@ Stories (e.g., the story of Moses, Noah, and Salih), which served two 
purposes: to reassure the Prophet’s heart, as he was met with rejection in 
Mecca, and as cautionary tales for the pagans (see 11:120-123). Other 
stories (e.g., Joseph and Job) focus on moral lessons. 


3%% The Unseen (e.g., the belief in Allah and His qualities, as well as 
angels, resurrection, judgment, etc.), which reaffirms one’s faith in the 
divine through one’s heart, not eyes. 


Some chapters contain more than one theme, and some individual verses 
may touch on a theme not presented here, but the following table represents 
the general themes covered in the body of the text. 

kkk 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR 

ACKNOWLEGMENTS 

TRANSLATOR’S NOTES 

INTRODUCTION 

STYLISTIC FEATURES OF THE QURAN 

NOTES ON TRANSLATION 

TRANSLITERATION GUIDE 

MAP OF ARABIA AND AREA IN THE 7th CENTURY 


THE CLEAR QURAN 
xt 1. The Opening (Al-Fatihah) 
© x 2. The Cow (Al-Baqarah) 
© x: 3. The Family of Imran (Ali-’Imran) 
xt 4. Women (An-Nisd') 
© x 5. The Spread Table (Al-Ma'idah) 
© x 6. Cattle (Al-An’am) 


8. Spoils of War _(Al-Anfal) 
9. Repentance (At-Tawbah) 
© x 10. Jonah (Yunus) 


© x 11. Hid (Hid) 


xt 13. Thunder (Ar-Ra’d) 
© x 14. Abraham (Ibrahim) 
© x 15. The Stone Valley_(Al-Hijr) 
x+ 16. Bees (An-Nahl) 
xt 17. The Night Journey (Al-Isra’') 
© x: 18. The Cave (Al-Kahf) 
© x 19. Mary (Mariam) 


@ x: 20. Țâ-Hâ (Ja-Hd) 


© x 21. 


y 22 
Rex 23 


. The Pilgrimage (Al-Hajj) 


. The Believers (Al-Mu'mintin) 


x 24 


. The Light (An-Nûr), 


25 


© x 26 


. The Standard (Al-FurgGn) 


. The Poets (Ash-Shu’ard’) 


© x 27 


. The Ants (An-Naml) 


© x 28 


_The Whole Story (Al-Qasa5$) 


fr 
R 
fr 


© x 29 
xt 30 


fr 


. The Spider (Al-’Ankabit) 


. The Romans (Ar-Riim) 
xt 31. Lugman (Luqmân) 
xt 32. The Prostration (As-Sajdah) 
x 33. 


© x 34. 


The Enemy Alliance (Al-Ahzâb) 


Sheba _(Saba') 


y 35, 


The Originator (Fatir) 
Ya-Sin (Yd-Sin) 


© x 36. 
@ x 37. 


Those ‘Angels’ Lined up in Ranks (AS-Sdffat) 


© x 38. Sad (Sad) 


z 29 


_ The ‘Successive’ Groups (Az-Zumar) 
. The Forgiver_(Ghdfir) 


© x 40 
© x 41 


. Verses’ Perfectly Explained (Fussilat) 


x 42 


© x 43 


. Consultation (Ash-Shira) 


_Ornaments (Az-Zukhruf) 


Bx 44 


. The Haze _(Ad-Dukhan) 


xt 45. 
. The Sand-Hills (Al-Ahgdf) 


© x 46 


49. The Private Quarters (Al-Hujurdt) 


xt 47, Muhammad (Muhammad) 


x: 48. The Triumph (Al-Fath), 


x 50. Qaf (Qaf) 


. m oe ey ee) | 


% OS 


. The Stars (An-Najm) 


Ox 54 


. The Moon (Al-Qamar) 


sos 
xt 56 


. The Most Compassionate _(Ar-Rahmân) 


. The Inevitable Event (Al-Wagi’ah) 


58 
z D9 
60 
61 


xt 64 
xt 65 
xt 66 
xt 67 


xt 57. Iron (Al-Hadid) 
. The Pleading Woman (Al-Mujddilah) 


. The Banishment (Al-Hashr) 
_ The Test of Faith _(Al-Mumta hanah) 
. The “Solid” Ranks (AS-Saff) 


62. Friday Congregation (Al-Jumu’ah) 
63. 


. Mutual Loss and Gain (At-Taghdbun) 
65. Divorce (Af- [alaq) 
. The Prohibition (At-Tahrim) 


_ All Authority (Al-Mulk) 


© x 68 


_ The Pen (Al-Qalam) 


© x 69 


. The Inevitable Hour (Al-Hâqqah) 


x 70. 
71. Noah (Nah) 


© 71 
x 72 


. The Jinn (Al-Jinn) 


x 73. 


xt 74 


. The One Covered up _(Al-Muddaththir) 


xt 75 


. The ‘Rising for’ Judgment (Al-Qiyamah) 


76 


. Humans (Al-Insân) 
. Those "Winds" Sent Forth _(Al-Mursalât) 


xt 77 
x: 78 


. The Momentous News (An-Naba') 


Ox 79 


. Those ‘Angels’ Stripping out “Souls” (An-Ndzi’dt) 


x 80 


. He Frowned (Abasa) 


x: 81 


. Putting out “the Sun” (At-Takwir) 


xx 82. 
x 83. 
xt 84. 


Ox 85 


. Constellations (Al-Burûj) 


xt 86 
x 87 


_The Nightly Star (At- Tariq) 


. The Most High (AI-A’la) 


x: 88. 
x: 89 


„Dawn _ (Al-Fajr) 


x 90 


. The City _(Al-Balad) 
. The Sun (Ash-Shams) 


Ox 91 


x 92. 


93 


. The Morning Sunlight (A@-Duha) 


94, Uplifting the Heart (Ash-Shar/h) 


Ja 
96. 


98. 
99. 


101 


oe oe e E a 


102 
103 


100. 
. The Striking Disaster _(Al-Q4ri’ah) 


The Fig _(At-Tin) 
The Clinging Clot ‘of Blood’ (Al-’Alaq) 


The Clear Proof (Al-Bayyinah) 
The "Ultimate’ Quake (Az-Zalzalah) 


. Competition for More "Gains" (At-Takdathur) 


. The "Passage of’ Time (Al-’ASr) 


104 


xt 


© 105 


. The Backbiters (Al-Humazah) 


_ The Elephant (Al-Fil) 


xt 


106. 


107. “Simplest” Aid (Al-M@’tin) 


. Abundant Goodness _(Al-Kawthar) 


. The Disbelievers (Al-Kâfirûn) 
. The ‘Ultimate’ Help (An-Nasr) 
. The Palm-Fibre Rope (Al-Masad) 


. Purity of Faith (Al-Ikhlds) 


113, 


. Humankind (An-Nds) 


x 108 
109 
110 

x 111 

x 112 
114 
THEMATI 


CINDEXT 


ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR 


With over two decades of experience in Arabic-English Islamic translation, 
Dr. Mustafa Khattab is a Canadian-Egyptian authority on interpreting the 
Quran. He was a member of the first team that translated the Ramadan night 
prayers (Tarawih) live from the Sacred Mosque in Mecca and the Prophet’s 
Mosque in Medina (2002-2005). He memorized the entire Quran at a young 
age, and later obtained a professional ijâzah in the Hafs style of recitation 
witha chain of narrators going all the way to Prophet Muhammad 
A 16): Dr. Khattab received his Ph.D., M.A., and B.A. in Islamic Studies 
i lish with Honors from Al-Azhar University’s Faculty of Languages 
& Translation. He lectured on Islam at Clemson University (OLLI Program, 
2009-2010), held the position of Lecturer at Al-Azhar University for over a 
decade starting in 2003, and served as the Muslim Chaplain at Brock 
University (2014-2016). He is a member of the Canadian Council of Imams 
and a Fulbright Interfaith Scholar. He has served as an Imam in the U.S.A. 
and Canada since 2007 and is the author of The Nation of Islam (2011) and 
Outfoxing Fox News (2017), and contributor to the Encyclopedia of Muslim 
American History (2010). His forthcoming works include: Qamus-ul-Quran 
(The Dictionary of Quranic Vocabulary), The Illustrated Clear Quran for 
Kids, and Shukran: the Grateful Young Man. 
kkk 


ACKNOWLEGMENTS 


First I praise the Almighty for His guidance and assistance. I am eternally 
indebted to Dr. Muhammad M. Abu-Laylah, Dr. Esam Fayez, Dr. Ahmed 
Shafik Elkhatib, Dr. Reda Bedeir, Dr. Hassan M. Wageih, Dr. Rasha Al- 
Disugi, Dr. Saeed Attia, Dr. Salah Nefeily, Dr. Ahmad Ezabi, and all my 
professors and colleagues at Al-Azhar University. 


I am thankful to Imam Refaat Mohamed, Imam Sherif Ayoup, Imam Amr 
Dabour, Dr. Imam Arafat Elashi, Imam Muhammad Mustafa, Imam 
Muhammad Abuelezz, Imam Goma’a Makhlouf, Imam Mohamed Masloh, 
and Imam Ahmad Seddeeg for their valuable feedback. 


My thanks go to the chief editors, particularly Abu-Isa Webb for his help 
with editing, styling, and formatting the work and co-authoring the 
introduction, as well as Aaron Wannamaker and Hisham Sharif, along with 
the following sub-editors: Sarah Halabi, Yasmeen Mezil, Harris Sheikh, 
Celine Dean, Akber Ali, and Jason Gowrie. 


I also would like to express my deepest gratitude to the following brothers 
and sisters for proofreading some parts of this work: Aayesha Bonnie 
Kalicak, Abdullah Al-Hassan, Abubakr Elghul, Ahmed Ahmed, Ahmed 
Mezil, Ahmed Qassem, Ala Qubaja, Ali Al-Harazi, Ali Younes, Anthony 
Stehouwer, Aqib Nakhooda, Bilkis Al Haddad, Brenda Hyde, Carol Dohn, 
Charmaine Kissmann, Dana Younes, Desmond Sequeira, Emina Tihak, 
Fahim Khan, Faisal Hejazi, Habib Abdul-Habib, Hanan Awadh, Jana 
Bataineh, Janette Bramley, Kaalyn Thomson, Karim Ismail, Kevin Ruffle, 
Khairija Stehouwer, Kolton Uitbeyerse, Logaina Satti, Mahabba Ahmed, 
Malik Watson, Meshari Al-Otaibi, Misbah Shaikh, Mohammed Halabi, 
Muhamad M. Abutaha, Nayrah Islamovic, Nicole Cathcart, Osama Fadel, 
Salum ‘Zanjibar’ Mshoka, Sulaiman El-Salah, Syed Shafqat, Taher Shayeb, 
Tamer Fadaly, Yageen El-Haj, Yahya Ianiri, Yasin Cetin, Yusuf Al-Harazi, 
and Yusuf Fattore. 


Thanks are also due to Hemen Mahmoudi and Nasir Dowlatkhahi for 
technical support. 


This translation could not have been done without the generous 
contributions of the Niagara Pakistani community, Dr. Tareq Omar Azabi, 
and Dr. Riad Tarrabain, with a special thanks to the Islamic Society of St. 
Catharines, Ontario, Canada. 


I am grateful to my parents, my wife Dr. Fawziyah Abdelqadir, and my 
children (Yasmin, Ziyad, Noura, and Omar) for their patience and support 
throughout this journey. 


Whatever good is in this work is from Allah. 
Only the mistakes are mine. 
kkk 


TRANSLATOR’S NOTES 


It was a summer day in Toronto and I had just finished leading the Friday 
congregation at a downtown mosque. On the way home I had an unlikely 
encounter, since all my cab-drivers in Toronto had been Muslims so far. 
That day my driver was non-Muslim, so he was able to identify me as 
Muslim simply because of my traditional Arab garb. Out of nowhere, he 
commented, “I think Muslims are good, but Islam is evil!” Taken aback by 
this Fox News style rhetoric, I responded, “Well, first of all thanks for the 
compliment about Muslims, but why do you think Islam is bad?” He 
replied, “Because your holy book calls me an animal.” In astonishment, I 
answered, “I know the whole Quran by heart and I don’t think it says that 
anywhere!” He cited 8:55, and I responded by telling him that the word 
dabbah in Arabic does not mean an animal but a living being (see 24:45). 
He persisted, saying that his translation says so. I later checked many 
popular translations by Muslims and non-Muslims and realized that the man 
was right. This fateful encounter opened my eyes to the rampant 
misrepresentations of the Quran. 


Ape 

The Quran was revealed to Prophet Muhammad (6157) in the 7% 
century and was not translated into English by a Mu im until the 20% 
century. Many Muslims had long believed that the Quran should only be 
read in Arabic, the original language of revelation. This led to many 
inaccurate, ill-willed translations by missionaries and orientalists—which 
explains why we still see some words like ‘holy war’ and ‘infidels’ as well 
as many theological inaccuracies in some existing translations. All this 
leads to endless false assumptions about Islam and Muslims. Some Muslim 
translators are no better off than their non-Muslim counterparts because 
they are not well-versed in Arabic, or English, or Islamic studies, or 
translation, or all of the above. Looking up words in an Arabic-English 
dictionary or copying earlier translations when frustrated does not always 
guarantee accuracy in translation. There are some noteworthy modern 
translations like that of Dr. Ahmad Zaki Hammad (2007) and Dr. M.A.S. 
Abdel Haleem (2004), but many are either overtranslated, making it 


difficult for laypeople to understand, or undertranslated, doing a great 
disservice to the Quran. This is why I saw a need for an accurate, smooth, 
and accessible translation. 


To achieve accuracy, I have made use of the greatest and most 
celebrated works of old and modern tafsir (Quran commentaries), and 
shared the work with several Imams in North America for feedback and 
insight. For clarity, every effort has been made to select easy to understand 
words and phrases that reflect the beauty and power of the original text. 
Along with informative footnotes, verses have been grouped and titled 
based on their themes for a better understanding of the sûrahs, their main 
concepts, and internal coherence. 


Thanks to our editing and proofreading teams led by Abu-Isa Webb, I 
believe that what you are holding in your hands now is the most accurate 
and eloquent translation of the Final Revelation: The Clear Quran. 


Mustafa Khattab 
kkk 


INTRODUCTION 


The first translation of the Quran into English was done in 1649 by 
Alexander Ross. Since that first translation, many more attempts have been 
made to penetrate the work from an outside, academic point of view, but it 
wasn’t until the early 20" century that the Quran was first translated by 
Muslims. In 1934, Abdullah Yusuf Ali published one of the most widely 
circulated translations to date. 


Aside from concerns about academia and orientalism, translating the 
Quran can be an enormous task even for the sincere of heart. Arabic, as a 
Semitic language, has words that have meanings and shades of meanings 
which do not easily move over into English, and total mastery of both 
languages is needed before any truly satisfactory translation can be put 
forward. Translators also struggle to render what they believe to be the right 
meaning into a foreign language—knowing that it is almost impossible to 
reflect the Arabic style, rhythms, and figures of speech, while also 
struggling with different interpretations of the original Arabic words. 


The development of linguistics, current events, and the gradual drift of 
the English language puts us in an important time to move forward in 
Quranic translations. For the most part, a lack of understanding Arabic can 
be seen in older, less popular works from European scholars, however 
mistakes and errors are persistent in more modern copies, and blunders can 
even be found in the likes of Yusuf Ali when he writes, “those who believe 
not in the hereafter name the angels with female names.” (53:27) A brief 
survey of names such as Gabriel, Michael, and Malik offers no female 
names whatsoever. Keeping in mind that some pagan Arabs believed that 
the angels were Allah’s daughters, the true translation can be rendered, 
“those who do not believe in the Hereafter label the angels as female.” 


The failure to understand the complex forms of Classical Arabic found 
in the Quran, and sometimes found only in the Quran, can be a stumbling 
block for many scholars, but even those with a strong understanding of 
Arabic need to have their intelligence backed with the wisdom found in a 


sound theological background. Without understanding the religious context 
of the Quran, such mistakes can be made as when Muhsin Khan & 
Muhammad al-Hilali write, “Allah will never lead a people astray after He 
has guided them until He makes clear to them as to what thay should 
avoid.” (9:115). In context, the verse is instructing the Prophet ( . {4 zle) and 
his companions that they should no longer pray to Allah for ihe TAN 
of polytheists after their death. As pointed out by Ibn Kathîr, drawing on the 
understanding of At-Tabari, the meaning is clearly “Allah would never 
consider a people deviant after He has guided them, until He makes clear to 
them what they must avoid.” 


For these reasons it is clear that any translation of the Quran must be 
led by scholars with a profound understanding of the theological context of 
the Quran, as well as a native understanding of Arabic, but also 
considerable training in the meaning of the Classical Arabic particular to 
the Quran. These three things enable a scholar to truly understand the 
Quran, and a profound understanding is the first step towards a good 
translation. 


Of course, a firm understanding of Arabic is not all that is needed in 
order to translate the Quran effectively. The Quran states repeatedly that it 
is accessible, clear, and easy to understand, so it would be an error to 
translate it into dense or inaccessible language. Naturally, the academic 
traditions that first dealt with translating the Quran value language density, 
and the religious and scholarly traditions of the English language assume a 
correlation between complexity of language and truth. This correlation has 
been carried over into translations of the Quran despite complexity, density, 
and inaccessibility being tenets far from Islamic scholarly tradition. What 
we are left with are translations that, though they may be technically 
correct, miss the simplicity, vigour, or eloquence of the original in favour of 
a contrived sense of divinity. 


Two striking examples of overinflated, though accurate, English 
translations come to mind. First, M.M. Pickthall writes, “Be modest in thy 
bearing and subdue thy voice. Lo! the harshest of all voices is the voice of 
the ass.” (31:19) In today’s English, this can only be read as a rather vulgar 
Statement, especially by non-academic readers and should instead be 


rendered, “Be moderate in your pace and lower your voice, for the ugliest 
of all voices is certainly the braying of donkeys.” Second, T.B. Irving writes 
of 44:16, “Some day We will kidnap everyone in the greatest operation; We 
shall be Avenged!” Giving Allah a distinctly immature, vindictive, and even 
rueful voice where a more appropriate translation is, ““On'’ the Day We will 
deal ‘you’ the fiercest blow, We will surely inflict punishment.” 


The tone of the Quran, as a revelation for all humanity, relies heavily 
on a number of emotions as well, and a poor understanding of English can 
lead even great scholars of Arabic into error with translation. There are 
numerous instances in the Quran of sarcasm and wit, which are often lost 
entirely in complicated and fragile grammar structures. Elegance and prose 
are also usually cast out of translations, especially when scholars use a rigid 
word-for-word replacement technique to encode Arabic into a mock- 
English cypher that sometimes gives the opposite meaning of what is 
intended in the verse. The problem with undervaluing the subtleties and 
intricacies of human language can be underlined by examining the work of 
Dr. M. Mahmoud Ghali. He translates 4:105, “and do not be a constant 
adversary of the treacherous.” The true translation of this verse is, “so do 
not be an advocate for the deceitful.” Another example is his English 
translation of the Arabic word ‘khair’ to ‘charity’. The Arabic term ‘khair’ 
has multiple meanings and often has nothing to do with charitable giving. 
Instances of such inaccuracy transform the meaning of Quranic verses. For 
example, 100:8 reads “And surely he is indeed constantly (passionate) in 
his love for charity,” where “love for charity” in fact refers to “greed for 
‘worldly’ gains.” Likewise, 33:25, which speaks of the enemy alliance that 
laid a siege around Muslims in Medina, reads “they attained no charity,” 
whereas the verse actually talks about “war gains.” 


In respecting the order and particulars of the Arabic words being used, 
the meaning of dozens of idioms are lost in translation, hundreds of 
sentences become a tangled mess of improper grammar, and the flow and 
ease of reading is entirely lost. It is better to respect the meaning and power 
of the Quran than the language it happened to be revealed in, otherwise one 
might end up with the near blasphemous statement found in the Saheeh 
International translation, “They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten 
them.” (9:67) Surely Allah does not ‘forget’ anything or anyone (see 


20:52). Google Translate might give up a similar translation, but the 
meaning is poetic, it is much closer to ‘neglect.’ Both parties are aware of 
each other, but when humans neglect their duties to Allah, He neglects them 
in the Fire: “They neglected Allah, so He neglected them.” 


Aside from these more theologically problematic translation issues, 
there are dozens of simple grammar structures in the Quran that are easy, 
clear, or beautiful in Arabic, but entirely untranslatable. Rather than try to 
fit the English structures and words into a foreign context, it is much better 
to accept English for what it has to offer and use its own native poetry and 
balance to create a translation that carries the real meaning and power of the 
Perfect Book. 


With grammar and the particularities of translating aside, a 
considerable understanding of the context of the Quranic revelation itself as 
well as the stories found within is needed in order to render a proper 
English translation. For example, the word ‘corn’ is no longer used to 
describe all forms of grain, yet many translations still use this word to 
describe the fields in the dream of the King in the story of Joseph (12:43 
and 46). When Yusuf Ali first wrote this in 1934, it may have been 
acceptable to refer to wheat as a kind of corn, but in modern vocabulary this 
is totally unheard of, yet many translations simply erroneously copy that 
word into their own works. 


It is clear that the modern age demands not only a great scholar of 
Arabic and the Quran to come to the table, but also a modern, adaptable 
scholar of the English language, as well as someone with native fluency 
who knows how the translation will be received. 


The reception of the Quran by English audiences now indicates a third 
stage in the historical development of Quran translation. At first it was an 
academic exercise, a curious study of the ‘other.’ Next, Muslims translated 
the Quran as a matter of love or pride, and they shared it among themselves. 
With this long history and background, and a team of experts in the Quran 
and in the English language, the struggle we now face is transmitting the 
real beauty and message of the Quran to Muslims and non-Muslims alike 
who are interested in it and who also know and love English. 


The Alcoran of Ross was the first small step forward, and Yusuf Ali’s 
The Holy Qur’an was a turning point in the history of the Quran in English. 
The next step is to overcome the obstacles outlined here and to deliver 
Allah’s Final Testament to English speaking audiences like never before. 


The next step is The Clear Quran. 
ok ok 


STYLISTIC FEATURES OF THE QURAN 


The Quran was revealed in 7" century Arabia, where people took so much 
pride in their mastery of Arabic that literary fairs were commonly held and 
prized poems were inscribed in gold for all to see. The Quran, which is 
believed to be Allah’s inimitable Word, is a literary miracle, unmatched by 
any other work of Arabic literature. While Arabic has served as the medium 
for communicating the Quranic message, the Quran has forever changed the 
landscape of Arabic literary tradition, promoting Arabic to a leading world 
language and influencing other languages including Farsi, Urdu, Swahili, 
Turkish, Spanish, and many others. Several sciences have emerged to serve 
the Quran such as tafsir (Quranic commentary), tawhid (theology), fiqh 
(jurisprudence), tajwid (phonetic rules of recitation), qirâ'ât (styles of 
recitation), nahw and Sarf (grammar and morphology), baldghah (rhetoric), 
and khatt (calligraphy). Algebra was also developed in part to solve issues 
related to the distribution of inheritance shares laid | gukin Sirah 4. Together 
with the Sunnah or the example of the Prophet ( (%12), the Quran is the 
bedrock of Muslim civilization and the main squrt® of Islamic law and 
practice. The following are some of the distinctive stylistic features of the 
Quran in its original Arabic form. 


Structure 

The body of the Quran is made up of 6236 verses (or âyât, plural of dyah, 
which literally means sign, proof, or miracle), composed of 114 sûrahs (or 
chapters) in more than 600 pages. A sûrah usually takes its name from the 
main theme, a story, or a distinctive word within it. With the exception of 
Sirah 9, all sûrahs begin with the basmalah: “In the Name of Allah—the 
Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.” Depending on their respective siirah, 
verses typically rhyme and vary in length—some are long (2:282 is the 
longest at fifteen lines long), while others are short (20:1 is the shortest at 
only two Arabic letters). The Quran is divided into 30 parts (or ajzâ', plural 
of juz’), each with 8 subparts (or arbd’, plural of rub’), making it 
convenient for reading and memorization. 


Of the Quran’s 114 siirahs, eighty-six are classified as Meccan because 
they were revealed before the Prophet’s emigration to Medina. These 
sûrahs focus mainly on restoring the belief in the One True God. The other 
twenty-eight sûrahs are categorized as Medinian since they were revealed 
after the Prophet’s emigration from Mecca with an emphasis on the 
commandments regarding a Muslim’s relationship with their Lord, their 
fellow humans, and the rest of Allah’s creation. Some Meccan sûrahs may 
have Medinian verses and vice versa. Sûrahs and passages were revealed 
over a period of twenty-three years to address issues facing the Muslim 

ipgnity. As instructed by Allah through the angel Gabriel, the Prophet 
( 2) ordered his scribes to arrange siirahs mostly according to their 
be: s, with the longest stirahs first, not chronologically. 


Although the Quran is not arranged chronologically, the stirahs are 
perfectly interrelated. Some of the stories or themes that are touched on 
passingly in one sûrah are explained in detail in the next sûrah (see 12:105 
and 13:1-17). In some cases, both the end of a sûrah and the beginning of 
the next sûrah cover the same subject (see 53:57-62 and 54:1-5). One sûrah 
might give some stories and the next will continue the narrative by adding 
more stories (see sûrahs 37 and 38). Additionally, two consecutive sûrahs 
might cover the exact same themes, but in a different order (see stirahs 55 
and 56). 


Quranic stirahs have diverse themes, with main overarching subjects 
(e.g., verses 2:221-242), interjected by secondary subjects (e.g., verses 
2:238-239). In essence, all themes have a common denominator: one’s 
relationship with their Creator and the rest of His creation. Assuming that 
not everyone will read the Quran in its entirety, readers will run into this 
common denominator at any given sarah. 


Style 
With the word ‘Quran’ (lit., recitation) repeated about seventy times, the 
Quran is unique in that it actually speaks about itself, its Revealer, its 
purpose, its devotees, and its detractors. The author of this profound book is 
nowhere to be found on the cover; rather He reveals Himself on every page, 
speaking with authority, offering compelling proofs, giving commandments 
to prophets, believers, and all of humanity. 


Perhaps one of the most visible stylistic features of the Quran is 
repetition, which comes in three different forms: 


1) Repetitive phrases such as “Then which of your Lord’s favours will you 
both deny?” which appears a total of thirty-one times in Sirah 55 and “Woe 
on that Day to the deniers!” which appears ten times in Sirah 77. Far from 
redundancy, the purpose of repetition in these two instances is to create an 
impact by reinforcing the point being made—to acknowledge Allah’s many 
blessings in the former and deter people from denying Allah in the latter. 
This rhetorical device is still employed by many modern orators. One of the 
most notable examples is the repetition of “I have a dream” and “Let 
freedom ring” in Martin Luther King’s 1963 famous speech. 


2) Repetitive themes such as the arguments for Allah’s oneness, 
uniqueness, and power in siirahs 16, 35, and 112; the comparison between 
Paradise and Hell in stirahs 37, 39, 40, and 41; and the horrors of Judgment 
Day in sûrahs 77, 78, 79, 80, and 81. The purpose is to emphasize a 
recurring theme (e.g., the reward of the believers and disbelievers) or 
present more details (e.g., the testimony of bodily organs in 41:19-24 and 
the fruit of the Zaqqûm tree in 37:62-68). 


{LE 
3) Repetitive stories such Ki; story of Moses Ee zle) in sûrahs 7, 18, 
26, and 28 and Abraham (44o) in sûrahs 2, 6, ia 37. The purpose is 
to reassure the Prophet ( (22) and focus on a different aspect of the life 
of tise prophets. For (exmple, the highlights of the story of Moses 
(l2) in Sirah 7 are the arrogance of Pharaoh, the defeat of the 
agieians, and the suffering of the Children of Israel. In Sirah 26, the focus 


shifts to Moses’ childhood, his unintentional killing of an Egyptian man, as 
well as his escape to Midian and his marriage. 


w 
I 


The fact that these repetitive themes and stories are perfectly 
consistent, despite having been revealed over the course of two decades to 
an unlettered prophet, is yet another proof of the divine source of the Quran. 


The Quran contains some fascinating numerical patterns. For example, 
‘Paradise’ and ‘Hell’ are each repeated 77 times, ‘angels’ and ‘devils’ 88 
times, ‘world’ and ‘Hereafter’ 115 times, ‘prayers’ (Salawat) 5 times (the 
exact number of daily prayers), ‘punishment’ 117 times, whereas 


‘forgiveness’ is repeated double that number, 234 times. ‘Day’ is repeated 
365 times (the average number of days in the year), ‘days’ 30 times (the 
average number of days in the month), and ‘month’ 12 times (the number of 
months in the year). 


Sarcasm is another common feature of the Quran, especially when it 
talks about the fate of those who ridicule the truth (see 24:53 and 44:49). So 
readers can expect to see a warning such as: “Give them good news of a 
painful punishment.” This style aims at paying the ridiculers back in kind as 
well as adding more intensity to the warning. 


Many passages in the Quran utilize a preferential style called tafail— 
that is to say, two things share a certain quality but one of them supersedes 
the other. For example, the Quran says repeatedly that the people of 
Pharaoh were more powerful and resourceful than the people of Mecca. 
However, some structures look like tafdil but do not actually signify a 
comparison in quality. The assumption that both sides share the same 
quality but one is greater than the other is what causes confusion in most 
translations of the Quran. Fas sample, when 12:33 suggests that going to 
prison is dearer to Joseph ( .{<- |<) than committing adultery, this does not 
mean that either option is fleaf-to him. Similarly, 17:84 suggests that the 
believers’ Way is better in guidance than that of the pagans, but in truphitbe 
latter is not guided at all. Furthermore, 11:78 suggests that Lot (.(27{<) 
instructs men that the single women of his nation are purer for nite 
than other men, when other men are not pure for marriage in the first place. 


Emphasis 
Emphasis is commonplace in the Quran, especially where a concept is 
likely to be challenged by the skeptics. Sometimes one or more emphasis 
words are used, such as ‘surely,’ ‘indeed,’ and ‘certainly’ (see 15:9). The 
repetition of a sentence two consecutive times is also used as emphasis, 
such as 102:3-4: “But no! You will soon come to know. Again, no! You will 
soon come to know.” The repetition of a verb in its noun form can also be 
used to similar effect. If translated literally, 56:4 will read, “When the earth 
will be shaken with a shaking,” whereas the meaning is: “When the earth 
will be violently shaken.” Lastly, an oath is one of the most common forms 
of emphasis. Allah has the right to swear by any of His creation, such as the 


sun and the moon, the day and night, the heaven and earth (91:1-6). 
However, a Muslim can only swear by Allah. 


Persons, Time, and Place 
To prove its divine nature, the Quran often refers to past events that were 
not known to anyone at the time of the reyglagon (see 12:25-42 and 27:17- 
28), constantly reminding the Prophet (.{27|<) that, since he was not an 
eyewitness to these events, it was throug, dfvine revelation that he came to 
know about them (see 12:102). The Quran also foretells future events that 
were later proven true (see 30:1-6 and 48:27). 


Unlike English, the Arabic language has only three tenses: past, 
present, and future. The Quran is unique in using the past tense to refer to 
future events, particularly when it describes the Day of Judgment (see 
39:68-75). In addition to reminding us that Allah is not bound by the limits 
of time, the aim is to give the impression that these events are so certain to 
happen that it is as if they have already happened. However, when these 
sentences are translated into English (or any other language for that matter), 
the future tense is used. 


Generalizations are also common in the Quran, where “the people,” or 
“the Jews,” etc., actually refers to a small group that said or did something 
that was not challenged by the larger group (see 5:64). 


With some exceptions, the Quran does not dwell on the names of 
persons, places, or times (see for example 2:259, 12:21-23, and 18:9-26). 
Rather, attention is usually focused on the moral of the story, making it 
valid for every people, time, and place. 


To express the greatness and magnitude of a definite noun (such as the 
Straight Path, the Merciful Lord, etc.), the Quran often uses that name in an 
indefinite form (a Straight Path, a Merciful Lord, etc.), but this translation 
uses the definite form in these instances in order to maintain the true 
meaning in English. 


The Quran states that the pleasures which Allah has prepared for the 
believers in Paradise are beyond human comprehension (see 32:17). Hence, 
generic terms (e.g., rivers, gardens, fruits, garments of silk, bracelets of 
gold, etc.) are often used to describe these pleasures in an appealing way, 


bringing it down to our level of understanding, whereas the realities of 
Paradise are far beyond these descriptions. These terms are no different than 
those one would have used in 1876 C.E. to describe a cutting-edge 
smartphone to Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone. 


Letters and Pronouns 

Of the twenty-nine letters of the Arabic alphabet, only fourteen appear in 
various combinations at the beginning of twenty-nine sûrahs of the Quran. 
These letters are: Niin, Sad, Ha, Kaf, Ya, Mim, Qadf, Alif, Ta, ’Ain, Lam, Ha, 
Sin, and Ra. According to Ibn Kathir, a renowned Quran commentator, in 
his explanation of 2:1, these letters can be arranged into an Arabic sentence 
that reads a7 eiS> bold “a “Suu which roughly translates to: “A wise, 
decisive text, full of wonders.” Although several theories have been 
suggested by scholars regarding the meaning of these letters, it is 
commonly believed that these letters are among the miracles of the Quran 
and, as such, no one knows their actual meaning except Allah. 


Unlike other conjunctions like fa c9 (then/right after) and thumma 
(then/later), wa 5 (and) does not signify an order of events. The subjects of 
‘and’ clauses have sometimes been rearranged for better flow in English, 
such as ‘day and night’ instead of ‘night and day,’ ‘seen and unseen’ instead 
of ‘unseen and seen,’ etc. (see 35:19-22). 


One of the first things that strikes novice readers of the Quran is that 
the word ‘We’ is frequently used when Allah speaks (see 15:9-23). This 
plural form, known as the royal we, is employed to indicate reverence and 
not number. Almost always, ‘Allah,’ ‘I,’ or ‘He’ is mentioned either before 
or after to emphasize Allah’s oneness. 


Another visible stylistic feature is the ‘rotation of pronouns’ (iltifat) 
found throughout the Quran, alternating between first person, second 
person, and third person (see 17:1). If rendered verbatim into English this 
rhetorical device becomes entirely meaningless, as it is rarely found in any 
Indo-European language at all, and almost never in English. 


A similar feature is found in the referential nature of pronouns in either 
language. In Classical Arabic, especially in the Quran, the repeated use of a 
single pronoun (such as ‘he’) rotates in reference, which is to say it first 


speaks of the first speaker, then the next use speaks of the second speaker, 
then back to the first, all using the same pronoun (see 26:24-31). In this 
way, repeatedly using “he said” would indicate a dialogue, whereas a direct 
translation of the conversation would be rendered as a monologue in 
English. The same can be said of other pronouns such as ‘they.’ 


The Quranic Challenge 
Unlike any other scripture, the Quran poses a falsification test to those who 
challenge its authenticity which, over time, was made easier and easier. The 
first challenge was to produce a similar book in Arabic (17:88). Next, the 
challenge was reduced to only ten siirahs (11:13). Finally, the challenge was 
to only produce one surah similar to it (10:38), and despite the shortest 
sûrah being only ten words (Sirah 108), none have been able to match it. 
The Quran also challenges readers to find contradictions (4:82). Some have 
attempted these challenges, only to prove their inability to match the 
elegance and eloquence of the divine revelation or their ignorance of the 
nuances of Arabic syntax and grammar. 
kkk 


NOTES ON TRANSLATION 


Allah’s names and attributes are capitalized as well as pronouns used to 
reference Him. 


Proper nouns referring to events and cosmology are also capitalized, such 
as the Day of Judgment, the Day, the Hour, the Hereafter, Paradise, and 
Hell. 


In some cases, the use of a pronoun would be confusing or misleading, so it 
has been replaced with the corresponding noun for clarity. Similarly, in 
some places where the ‘rotation of pronouns’ (iltifat) is found in the 
Arabic, pronouns have been altered in English to maintain pronoun 
agreement. 


Gendered pronouns have been replaced with ‘they’ where the meaning is 
neutral, except in the case of Allah, Who is referred to as ‘He’ despite being 
gender-neutral in order to preserve the use of a singular pronoun, while 
avoiding the use of ‘it.’ 


Unless otherwise indicated, Biblical quotations are from The Holy Bible: 
International Standard Version, copyright © the ISV Foundation, 1996- 
2012. 


Half brackets ™ indicate words inserted into the English which do not 
directly correspond to Arabic words in the original text. 


The most frequently used speech verb in the Quran is “said,” especially in 
conversation. To enrich conversations in English, several speech verbs are 
used in this translation (such as replied, cried, protested, pleaded, and 
threatened), depending on the meaning (see 18:71-73). 


The name “Muhammad” appears only four times in the Quran. In some 
cases, words such as “Prophet” and “Messenger” are used to address him. 
But most of the time, the Prophet is addressed in the second person “you,” 
this is when “O Prophet” will be used between half brackets ™ to indicate 
that “you” is referring to Muhammad ( A le) and not to the believers or 


anyone glse. 


per a calligraphic contraction of an Arabic phrase meaning ‘peace 


@n him,’ which is used respectfully after the mention of prophets 
utside the text of the Quran. 


“The Day of Judgment” and “Judgment Day” are equivalent and used 
interchangeably based on the flow in English. 


Abbreviations used in this translation: 
A.H. After Hijrah 
B.C.E. Before Common Era 
C.E. Common Era 
e.g., exempli gratia, ‘for example’ 
i.e., id est, ‘that is to say’ 
lit., literally 
2k 2K 


TRANSLITERATION GUIDE 


Arabic letter in red, transliteration in blue, followed by an example 


nN 


2 PCVOEG LOM FEC g pete EU OOO CEL 


> 
3S— 


in brackets ( ). 


â (Fatihah) 


...' (Nis@’) 


... b (Baqarah) 
... t (Tîn) 


... th (Kawthar) 
.. j (Fajr) 

„h (Hajj) 

.. kh (IkhlâS) 

.. d (Balad) 

.. Z, (Zâriyât) 
... T (A’rdf) 

..Z (Nazi’at) 


... S (Isrâ') 
... sh (Hashr) 
... S CAST) 
... d (Duha) 


... t (Tâ-Hâ) 
... Z (Zihâr) 
.. ” (An’am) 


.. gh (Ghdfir) 

... f (Furqân) 

.. q (Qalam) 
. k (Kahf) 


... | CAlaq) 
.. m (Mariam) 


.. n (Nah) 


.. h (Humazah) 


.. w (Waqi’ah) 


... û (Burdj) 


s... y (Yâ-Sîn) 

s... î(Ibrâhîm) 

Z... a (Shams) 
... 1 (Jinn) 


>... u (Mulk) SoN 


MAP OF ARABIA AND AREA IN THE 7th CENTURY 


Black Sea 


Azerbaijan 


BYZANTINE EMPIRE 


Tigiris River 


a 


Mediterranean Sea SYRIA 
e Damascus 


+ Jerusalem PERSIAN EMPIRE 


5 . 
Alexandria 


pai . Aylah 


+ Tabuk 


Arabian 
Gulf 


¢ Khaibar Bahrain 
Uhud 
e Medina 


Badr OMAN 


m Mecca 
. Taif 


Nile River 


e Najran 
YEMEN 


e Sanaa 
ABYSSINIA Arabian Sea 


>z 


THE CLEAR QURAN 
A Thematic English Translation 


LVS 


1. The Opening 
(Al-F ati hah) 


This Meccan strah, which is recited a total of seventeen times in the five 
daily prayers, serves as the cornerstone of the Quran. It sums up the 
relationship between the Creator and His creation, Allah’s undisputed 
authority in this world and the Hereafter, and humanity’s constant 
dependence on Him for guidance and assistance. The underlying theme 
is to acknowledge that He is the only god worthy of worship—a simple 
truth which the disbelievers fail to grasp. All fundamental principles 
encapsulated in this sûrah are spelled out in the rest of the Quran. 


Prayer for Guidance 
1. In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful. 2. All 
praise is for Allah—Lord of all worlds,!+ 3. the Most Compassionate, Most 
Merciful, 4. Master of the Day of Judgment. 5. You ‘alone’ we worship and 
You ‘alone’ we ask for help. 6. Guide us along the Straight Path, 7. the Path 
of those You have blessed—not those You are displeased with, or those who 


are astray. |2! 
kk 


2. The Cow 
(Al-Baqarah) 


This Medinian sûrah, which takes its name from the story of the cow in 
verses 67—73, details the main concepts of the previous sûrah, with 
emphasis on the qualities of the believers, disbelievers, and hypocrites; 


”{-) and the Children of Israel. Several rulings are given in regards to 
ital relationships, bequest, jihad, fasting, pilgrimage, donations, debts, 
and interest. Unlike the next sûrah, which focuses on the Christian 
perception of Jesus, this sûrah dedicates a sizable portion to Jewish 
attitudes and practices. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Qualities of the Believers 
1. Alif-Lãm-Mîm.!?] 2. This is the Book! There is no doubt about it'4/—a 
guide for those mindful ‘of Allah“! 3. who believe in the unseen,|®! 
establish prayer, and donate from what We have provided for them, 4. and 
who believe in what has been revealed to you "O Prophet™2! and what was 
revealed before you, and have sure faith in the Hereafter. 5. It is they who 
are ‘truly’ guided by their Lord, and it is they who will be successful. 


Qualities of the Disbelievers 
6. As for those who persist in disbelief, it is the same whether you warn 
them or not—they will never believe. 7. Allah has sealed their hearts and 
their hearing, and their sight is covered. They will suffer a tremendous 
punishment. 


Qualities of the Hypocrites 
8. And there are some who say, “We believe in Allah and the Last Day,” yet 
they are not ‘true’ believers. 9. They seek to deceive Allah and the 
believers, yet they only deceive themselves, but they fail to perceive it. 10. 
There is sickness in their hearts, and Allah ‘only’ lets their sickness 
increase. They will suffer a painful punishment for their lies. 11. When they 


are told, “Do not spread corruption in the land,” they reply, “We are only 
peace-makers!”!®! 12. Indeed, it is they who are the corruptors, but they fail 
to perceive it. 13. And when they are told, “Believe as others believe,” they 
reply, “Will we believe as the fools believe?” Indeed, it is they who are 
fools, but they do not know. 14. When they meet the believers they say, 
“We believe.” But when alone with their evil associates they say, “We are 
definitely with you; we were only mocking.” 15. Allah will throw their 
mockery back at them, leaving them to continue wandering blindly in their 
defiance. 16. They are the ones who trade guidance for misguidance. But 
this trade is profitless, and they are not ‘rightly’ guided. 


Hypocrites’ Example 
17. Their example is that of someone who kindles a fire, but when it lights 
up all around them, Allah takes away their light, leaving them in complete 
darkness—unable to see. 18. They are ‘wilfully’ deaf, dumb, and blind, so 
they will never return ‘to the Right Path’. 


Another Example 

19. Or ‘those caught in’ a rainstorm from the sky with darkness, thunder, 
and lightning. They press their fingers into their ears at the sound of every 
thunder-clap for fear of death. And Allah encompasses the disbelievers ‘by 
His might’. 20. It is as if the lightning were about to snatch away their sight. 
Whenever lightning strikes, they walk in its light, but when darkness covers 
them, they stand still. Had Allah willed, He could have taken away their 
hearing and sight. Surely Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


Order to Worship Allah Alone 
21. O humanity! Worship your Lord, Who created you and those before 
you, so that you may become mindful ‘of Him’. 22. "He is the One’ Who 
has made the earth a place of settlement for you and the sky a canopy; and 
sends down rain from the sky, causing fruits to grow as a provision for you. 
So do not knowingly set up equals to Allah ‘in worship’. 
The Challenge of the Quran 
23. And if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant,!¥! 


then produce a surah like it and call your helpers other than Allah, if what 
you say is true. 24. But if you are unable to do so—and you will never be 


able to do so—then fear the Fire fuelled with people and stones, which is 
prepared for the disbelievers. 


Reward of the Believers 
25. Give good news "O Prophet’ to those who believe and do good that they 
will have Gardens under which rivers flow. Whenever provided with fruit, 
they will say, “This is what we were given before,” for they will be served 
fruit that looks similar "but tastes different’. They will have pure spouses, 
[10] and they will be there forever. 


Wisdom Behind Parables 

26. Surely Allah does not shy away from using the parable of a mosquito or 
what is even smaller. As for the believers, they know that it is the truth from 
their Lord. And as for the disbelievers, they argue, “What does Allah mean 
by such a parable?” Through this ‘test’, He leaves many to stray, and guides 
many. And He leaves none to stray except the rebellious— 27. those who 
violate Allah’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break whatever ‘ties’ 
Allah has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in the land. It is 
they who are the ‘true’ losers. 


Allah’s Creation 
28. How can you deny Allah? You were lifeless and He gave you life, then 
He will cause you to die and again bring you to life, and then to Him you 
will ‘all’ be returned. 29. He is the One Who created everything in the earth 
for you. Then He turned towards the heaven, forming it into seven heavens. 
And He has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


Honouring Adam 
30. ‘Remember’ when your Lord said to the angels, “I am going to place a 
successive "human" authority on earth.” They asked ‘Allah’, “Will You 
place in it someone who will spread corruption there and shed blood while 
we glorify Your praises and proclaim Your holiness?” Allah responded, “I 
know what you do not know.”!4! 31. He taught Adam the names of all 
things, then He presented them to the angels and said, “Tell Me the names 
of these, if what you say is true?!!2!” 32. They replied, “Glory be to You! 
We have no knowledge except what You have taught us. You are truly the 
All-Knowing, All-Wise.” 33. Allah said, “O Adam! Inform them of their 
names.” Then when Adam did, Allah said, “Did I not tell you that I know 


the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you reveal and 
what you conceal?” 34. And ‘remember’ when We said to the angels, 
“Prostrate before Adam,”!42! so they all did—but not Iblîs, 4# who refused 
and acted arrogantly,'45! becoming unfaithful. 


Temptation and Fall 

35. We cautioned, “O Adam! Live with your wife in Paradise and eat as 
freely as you please, but do not approach this tree, or else you will be 
wrongdoers.” 36. But Satan deceived them—leading to their fall from the 
"blissful state they were in,4£! and We said, “Descend from the heavens "to 
the earth’ as enemies to each other.'4Z! You will find in the earth a residence 
and provision for your appointed stay.” 37. Then Adam was inspired with 
words "of prayer” by his Lord,!48! so He accepted his repentance. Surely He 
is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful. 38. We said, “Descend all of 
you! Then when guidance comes to you from Me, whoever follows it, there 
will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 39. But those who disbelieve 
and deny Our signs will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there 
forever.” 


Advice to the Israelites 
40. O children of Israel!'2! Remember My favours upon you. Fulfil your 
covenant and I will fulfil Mine, and stand in awe of Me ‘alone’. 41. Believe 
in My revelations which confirm your Scriptures.'22! Do not be the first to 
deny them or trade them for a fleeting gain.'24! And be mindful of Me. 42. 
Do not mix truth with falsehood or hide the truth knowingly. 43. Establish 
prayer, pay alms-tax,'22! and bow down with those who bow down. 
More Advice 

44. Do you preach righteousness and fail to practice it yourselves, although 
you read the Scripture? Do you not understand? 45. And seek help through 
patience and prayer. Indeed, it is a burden except for the humble— 46. 
those who are certain that they will meet their Lord and to Him they will 
return. 


Allah’s Favours upon the Israelites 1) Honour 
47. O Children of Israel! Remember ‘all’ the favours I granted you and how 
I honoured you above the others.'2! 48. Guard yourselves against the Day 


on which no soul will be of help to another. No intercession!24! will be 
accepted, no ransom taken, and no help will be given. 


Favour 2) Ending Persecution 
49. "Remember' how We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh, who 
afflicted you with dreadful torment, slaughtering your sons and keeping 
your women. That was a severe test from your Lord. 


Favour 3) Parting the Sea 
50. And ‘remember’ when We parted the sea, rescued you, and drowned 
Pharaoh’s people before your very eyes. 


Favour 4) Forgiving Calf-Worship 
51. And ‘remember’ when We appointed forty nights for Moses, then you 
worshipped the calf in his absence, acting wrongfully. 52. Even then We 
“still” forgave you so perhaps you would be grateful. 


Favour 5) Revealing the Torah 
53. And ‘remember’ when We gave Moses the Scripture—the standard "to 
distinguish between right and wrong’ that perhaps you would be ‘rightly’ 
guided. 


Favour 6) The Way to Forgiveness 
54. And ‘remember’ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! Surely 
you have wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf, so turn in repentance 
to your Creator and execute ‘the calf-worshippers among’ yourselves. That 
is best for you in the sight of your Creator.” Then He accepted your 
repentance. Surely He is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful. 


Favour 7) Forgiving the Demand to See Allah 
55. And ‘remember’ when you said, “O Moses! We will never believe you 
until we see Allah with our own eyes,” so a thunderbolt struck you while 
you were looking on. 56. Then We brought you back to life after your 
death, so that perhaps you would be grateful. 
Favour 8) Food and Shade 

57. And ‘remember when’ We shaded you with clouds and sent down to 
you manna and quails,'2°! ‘saying’, “Eat from the good things We have 
provided for you.” The evildoers ‘certainly’ did not wrong Us, but wronged 
themselves. 


Favour 9) Permission to Enter Jerusalem 
58. And ‘remember’ when We said, “Enter this city and eat freely from 
wherever you please; enter the gate with humility, saying, ‘Absolve us.’ We 
will forgive your sins and multiply the reward for the good-doers.” 59. But 
the wrongdoers changed the words they were commanded to say. So We 
sent down a punishment from the heavens upon them for their 
rebelliousness. 


Favour 10) Water for All 
60. And ‘remember’ when Moses prayed for water for his people, We said, 
“Strike the rock with your staff.” Then twelve springs gushed out, ‘and’ 
each tribe knew its drinking place. "We then said,’ “Eat and drink of Allah’s 
provisions, and do not go about spreading corruption in the land.” 


Punishment for Defiance 

61. And ‘remember’ when you said, “O Moses! We cannot endure the same 
meal "every day’. So ‘just’ call upon your Lord on our behalf, He will bring 
forth for us some of what the earth produces of herbs, cucumbers, garlic, 
lentils, and onions.” Moses scolded ‘them’, “Do you exchange what is 
better for what is worse? "You can" go down to any village and you will find 
what you have asked for.” They were stricken with disgrace and misery, and 
they invited the displeasure of Allah for rejecting Allah’s signs and unjustly 
killing the prophets. This is "a fair reward’ for their disobedience and 
violations. 


Reward of the Believers 
62. Indeed, the believers, Jews, Christians, and Sabians!2@!— whoever ‘truly’ 
believes in Allah and the Last Day and does good will have their reward 
with their Lord. And there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve. |22] 


Allah’s Covenant with the Israelites 
63. And ‘remember’ when We took a covenant from you and raised the 
mountain above you ‘saying’, “Hold firmly to that "Scripture’ which We 
have given you and observe its teachings so perhaps you will become 
mindful ‘of Allah’.” 64. Yet you turned away afterwards. Had it not been for 
Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, you would have certainly been of the 
losers. 


Punishment for the Sabbath-Breakers 


65. You are already aware of those of you who broke the Sabbath. We said 
to them, “Be disgraced apes!”!28! 66. So We made their fate an example to 
present and future generations, and a lesson to the God-fearing. 


Story of the Cow 

67. And ‘remember’ when Moses said to his people, “Allah commands you 
to sacrifice a cow.”'22! They replied, “Are you mocking us?” Moses 
responded, “I seek refuge in Allah from acting foolishly!” 68. They said, 
“Call upon your Lord to clarify for us what type ‘of cow’ it should be!” He 
replied, “Allah says, “The cow should neither be old nor young but in 
between. So do as you are commanded!’” 69. They said, “Call upon your 
Lord to specify for us its colour.” He replied, “Allah says, ‘It should be a 
bright yellow cow—pleasant to see.’” 70. Again they said, “Call upon your 
Lord so that He may make clear to us which cow, for all cows look the 
same to us. Then, Allah willing, we will be guided ‘to the right one’.” 71. 
He replied, “Allah says, ‘It should have been used neither to till the soil nor 
water the fields; wholesome and without blemish.’” They said, “Now you 
have come with the truth.” Yet they still slaughtered it hesitantly! 72. “This 
is’ when a man was killed and you disputed who the killer was, but Allah 
revealed what you concealed. 73. So We instructed, “Strike the dead body 
with a piece of the cow.” This is how ‘easily* Allah brings the dead to life, 
showing you His signs so that you may understand. 74. Even then your 
hearts became hardened like a rock or even harder, for some rocks gush 
rivers; others split, spilling water; while others are humbled in awe of 
Allah. And Allah is never unaware of what you do. 


Disobedient Israelites 
75. Do you ‘believers still’ expect them to be true to you, though a group of 
them would hear the word of Allah then knowingly corrupt it after 
understanding it? 76. When they meet the believers they say, “We believe.” 
But in private they say ‘to each other’, “Will you disclose to the believers 
the knowledge Allah has revealed to you,'22! so that they may use it against 
you before your Lord? Do you not understand?” 77. Do they not know that 
Allah is aware of what they conceal and what they reveal? 78. And among 
them are the illiterate who know nothing about the Scripture except lies, 
and "so` they "wishfully’ speculate. 79. So woelt! to those who distort the 
Scripture with their own hands then say, “This is from Allah”—seeking a 


fleeting gain! So woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to 
them for what they have earned. 


Argument and Refutation 

80. "Some of' the Jews claim, “The Fire will not touch us except for a 
number of days.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Have you taken a pledge from Allah— 
for Allah never breaks His word—or are you ‘just’ saying about Allah what 
you do not know?” 81. But no! Those who commit evil and are engrossed 
in sin will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever. 82. And 
those who believe and do good will be the residents of Paradise. They will 
be there forever. 


The Israelites’ Failure to Keep Covenants 

83. And ‘remember’ when We took a covenant from the children of Israel 
“stating', “Worship none but Allah; be kind to parents, relatives, orphans 
and the needy; speak kindly to people; establish prayer; and pay alms-tax.” 
But you ‘Israelites’ turned away—except for a few of you—and were 
indifferent. 84. And ‘remember’ when We took your covenant that you 
would neither shed each other’s blood nor expel each other from their 
homes, you gave your pledge and bore witness. 85. But here you are, killing 
each other and expelling some of your people from their homes, aiding one 
another in sin and aggression; and when those ‘expelled’ come to you as 
captives, you still ransom them—though expelling them was unlawful for 
you.'22! Do you believe in some of the Scripture and reject the rest? Is there 
any reward for those who do so among you other than disgrace in this 
worldly life and being subjected to the harshest punishment on the Day of 
Judgment? For Allah is never unaware of what you do. 86. These are the 
ones who trade the Hereafter for the life of this world. So their punishment 
will not be reduced, nor will they be helped. 


Denying Allah’s Prophets 
87. Indeed, We gave Moses the Book and sent after him successive 
messengers. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs and supported 
him with the holy spirit.'!22! Why is it that every time a messenger comes to 
you ‘Israelites’ with something you do not like, you become arrogant, 
rejecting some and killing others? 88. They say, “Our hearts are 


unreceptive!”!24! In fact, Allah has condemned them for their disbelief. 
They have but little faith. 


Rejecting the Quran 

89. Although they used to pray for victory ‘by means of the Prophet’ over 
the polytheists,!25! when there came to them a Book from Allah which they 
recognized,'26! confirming the Scripture they had ‘in their hands’, they 
rejected it. So may Allah’s condemnation be upon the disbelievers. 90. 
Miserable is the price they have sold their souls for—denying Allah’s 
revelation and resenting Allah for granting His grace to whoever He wills 
of His servants! They have earned wrath upon wrath. And such disbelievers 
will suffer a humiliating punishment. 


Excuse for Rejecting the Quran 
91. When it is said to them: “Believe in what Allah has revealed,” they 
reply, “We only believe in what was sent down to us,” and they deny what 
came afterwards, though it is the truth confirming their own Scriptures! Ask 
‘them, O Prophet’, “Why then did you kill Allah’s prophets before, if you 
are ‘truly’ believers?” 


Moses Was Defied Too 
92. Indeed, Moses came to you with clear proofs, then you worshipped the 
calf in his absence, acting wrongfully. 93. And when We took your 
covenant and raised the mountain above you ‘saying’, “Hold firmly to that 
Scripture’ which We have given you and obey,” they answered, “We hear 
and disobey.” The love of the calf was rooted in their hearts because of their 
disbelief. Say, "O Prophet,’ “How evil is what your ‘so-called’ belief 
prompts you to do, if you ‘actually’ believe ‘in the Torah"!” 
Clinging to Life 

94. Say, "O Prophet,’ “If the eternal’ Home of the Hereafter with Allah is 
exclusively for you ‘Israelites’ out of all humanity, then wish for death if 
what you say is true!” 95. But they will never wish for that because of what 
their hands have done.!Z! And Allah has “perfect knowledge of the 
wrongdoers. 96. You will surely find them clinging to life more eagerly 
than any other people, even more than polytheists. Each one of them wishes 
to live a thousand years. But even if they were to live that long, it would not 
save them from the punishment. And Allah is All-Seeing of what they do. 


Rejecting the Truth 

97. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Whoever is an enemy of Gabriel should know that he 
revealed this ‘Quran’ to your heart by Allah’s Will, confirming what came 
before it—a guide and good news for the believers.” 98. Whoever is an 
enemy of Allah, His angels, His messengers, Gabriel, and Michael, then ‘let 
them know that’ Allah is certainly the enemy of the disbelievers. 99. 
Indeed, We have sent down to you "O Prophet’ clear revelations. “But’ none 
will deny them except the rebellious. 100. Why is it that every time they 
make a covenant, a group of them casts it aside? In fact, most of them do 
not believe. 101. Now, when a messenger from Allah has come to them— 
confirming their own Scriptures—some of the People of the Book cast the 
Book of Allah behind their backs as if they did not know. 


Attachment to Magic 

102. They "instead" followed the magic promoted by the devils during the 
reign of Solomon. Never did Solomon disbelieve, rather the devils 
disbelieved. They taught magic to the people, along with what had been 
revealed to the two angels, Hârût and Marit, in Babylon. !28! The two angels 
never taught anyone without saying, “We are only a test ‘for you’, so do not 
abandon ‘your’ faith.” Yet people learned ‘magic’ that caused a rift ‘even’ 
between husband and wife; although their magic could not harm anyone 
except by Allah’s Will. They learned what harmed them and did not benefit 
them—although they already knew that whoever buys into magic would 
have no share in the Hereafter. Miserable indeed was the price for which 
they sold their souls, if only they knew! 103. If only they were faithful and 
mindful ‘of Allah’, there would have been a better reward from Allah, if 
only they knew! 


Advice for the Believers 
104. O believers! Do not say, “Rda’ina.” [Herd us!] But say, “UnZurna,” 
[Tend to us!] and listen "attentively’.!22! And the disbelievers will suffer a 
painful punishment. 105. The disbelievers from the People of the Book and 
the polytheists would not want you to receive any blessing from your Lord, 
but Allah selects whoever He wills for His mercy. And Allah is the Lord of 
infinite bounty. 


Obeying the Messenger 


106. If We ever abrogate!“"! a verse or cause it to be forgotten, We replace it 
with a better or similar one. Do you not know that Allah is Most Capable of 
everything? 107. Do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the 
earth belongs ‘only’ to Allah, and you have no guardian or helper besides 
Allah? 108. Or do you ‘believers’ intend to ask of your Messenger as Moses 
was asked before?!4!! But whoever trades belief for disbelief has truly 
strayed from the Right Way. 


Adhering to the Straight Path 

109. Many among the People of the Book wish they could turn you 
"believers’ back to disbelief because of their envy, after the truth has been 
made clear to them. Pardon and bear with them until Allah delivers His 
decision. Surely Allah is Most Capable of everything. 110. Establish prayer, 
and pay alms-tax. Whatever good you send forth for yourselves, you will 
‘certainly’ find ‘its reward’ with Allah. Surely Allah is All-Seeing of what 
you do. 


Claims and Refutations 
111. The Jews and Christians each claim that none will enter Paradise 
except those of their own faith. These are their desires. Reply, "O Prophet,’ 
“Show ‘me’ your proof if what you say is true.” 112. But no! Whoever 
submits themselves to Allah and does good will have their reward with their 
Lord. And there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 113. The 
Jews say, “The Christians have nothing to stand on” and the Christians say, 
“The Jews have nothing to stand on,” although both recite the Scriptures. 
And those ‘pagans’ who have no knowledge say the same ‘about people of 
faith’. Surely Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment 
regarding their dispute. 
Condemning Attacks on Places of Worship 

114. Who does more wrong than those who prevent Allah’s Name from 
being mentioned in His places of worship and strive to destroy them? Such 
people have no right to enter these places except with fear.'42) For them 
there is disgrace in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous 
punishment in the Hereafter. 115. To Allah belong the east and the west, so 
wherever you turn you are facing ‘towards’ Allah.'43) Surely Allah is All- 
Encompassing,'“! All-Knowing. 


Allah is in No Need of Children 
116. They!*2! say, “Allah has offspring.”!46! Glory be to Him! In fact, to 
Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth—all are subject to 
His Will. 117. "He is’ the Originator of the heavens and the earth! When He 
decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” And it is! 


True Guidance 

118. Those who have no knowledge say, “If only Allah would speak to us 
or a sign would come to us!” The same was said by those who came before. 
Their hearts are all alike. Indeed, We have made the signs clear for people 
of sure faith. 119. We have surely sent you with the truth "O Prophet’ as a 
deliverer of good news and a warner. And you will not be accountable for 
the residents of the Hellfire. 120. Never will the Jews or Christians be 
pleased with you, until you follow their faith. Say, “Allah’s guidance is the 
only ‘true’ guidance.” And if you were to follow their desires after ‘all’ the 
knowledge that has come to you, there would be none to protect or help you 
against Allah. 121. Those We have given the Book follow it as it should be 
followed. It is they who ‘truly’ believe in it. As for those who reject it, it is 
they who are the losers. 


Reminder of Favours upon the Israelites 
122. O Children of Israel! Remember My favours upon you and how I 
honoured you above the others. 123. And guard yourselves against the Day 
when no soul will be of any help to another. No ransom will be taken, no 
intercession accepted, and no help will be given. 


Abraham in Mecca 

124. ‘Remember’ when Abraham was tested by his Lord with ‘certain’ 
commandments, which he fulfilled. Allah said, “I will certainly make you 
into a role model for the people.” Abraham asked, “What about my 
offspring?” Allah replied, “My covenant is not extended to the 
wrongdoers.” 125. And "remember" when We made the Sacred Housel“! a 
centre and a sanctuary for the people ‘saying’, ““You may’ take the 
standing-place of Abraham!48! as a site of prayer.” And We entrusted 
Abraham and Ishmael to purify My House for those who circle it, who 
meditate in it, and who bow and prostrate themselves "in prayer’. 


Abraham's Prayers 


126. And ‘remember’ when Abraham said, “My Lord, make this city ‘of 
Mecca’ secure and provide fruits to its people—those among them who 
believe in Allah and the Last Day.” He answered, “As for those who 
disbelieve, I will let them enjoy themselves for a little while, then I will 
condemn them to the torment of the Fire. What an evil destination!” 


Raising the Foundation of the Sacred House 

127. And ‘remember’ when Abraham raised the foundation of the House 
with Ishmael, "both praying,’ “Our Lord! Accept ‘this’ from us. You are 
indeed the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 128. Our Lord! Make us both ‘fully’ 
submit to Youl?! and from our descendants a nation that will submit to you. 
Show us our rituals, and turn to us in grace. You are truly the Accepter of 
Repentance, Most Merciful. 129. Our Lord! Raise from among them a 
messenger who will recite to them Your revelations, teach them the Book 
and wisdom, and purify them. Indeed, You ‘alone’ are the Almighty, All- 
Wise.” 


One God 

130. And who would reject the faith of Abraham except a fool! We 
certainly chose him in this life, and in the Hereafter he will surely be among 
the righteous. 131. When his Lord ordered him, “Submit "to My Will’,” he 
responded, “I submit to the Lord of all worlds.” 132. This was the advice of 
Abraham—as well as Jacob—to his children, ‘saying’, “Indeed, Allah has 
chosen for you this faith; so do not die except in ‘a state of full’ 
submission.” 133. Or did you witness when death came to Jacob? He asked 
his children, “Who will you worship after my passing?” They replied, “We 
will ‘continue to’ worship your God, the God of your forefathers— 
Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac—the One God. And to Him we ‘all’ submit.” 
134. That was a community that had already gone before. For them is what 
they earned and for you is what you have earned. And you will not be 
accountable for what they have done. 


Prophets of Islam 
135. The Jews and Christians each say, “Follow our faith to be ‘rightly’ 
guided.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “No! We follow the faith of Abraham, the 
upright—who was not a polytheist.” 136. Say, "O believers,’ “We believe in 
Allah and what has been revealed to us; and what was revealed to Abraham, 
Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his descendants; and what was given to Moses, 


Jesus, and other prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between 
any of them. And to Allah we all submit.” 137. So if they believe in what 
you believe, then they will indeed be ‘rightly’ guided. But if they turn away, 
they are simply opposed ‘to the truth’. But Allah will spare you their evil. 
For He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Many Messengers; One Message 

138. This is the ‘natural’ Way of Allah. And who is better than Allah in 
ordaining a way? And we worship ‘none but’ Him. 139. Say, “Would you 
dispute with us about Allah, while He is our Lord and your Lord? We are 
accountable for our deeds and you for yours. And we are devoted to Him 
‘alone’. 140. Or do you claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his 
descendants were all Jews or Christians?” Say, “Who is more 
knowledgeable: you or Allah?” Who does more wrong than those who hide 
the testimony they received from Allah? And Allah is never unaware of 
what you do. 141. That was a community that had already gone before. For 
them is what they earned and for you is what you have earned. And you 
will not be accountable for what they have done. 


New Direction of Prayer 
142. The foolish among the people will ask, “Why did they turn away from 
the direction of prayer they used to face?”!22! Say, "O Prophet,” “The east 
and west belong ‘only’ to Allah. He guides whoever He wills to the Straight 
Path.” 143. And so We have made you “believers” an upright!=!! community 
so that you may be witnesses over humanity and that the Messenger may be 
a witness over you. We assigned your former direction of prayer only to 
distinguish those who would remain faithful to the Messenger from those 
who would lose faith. It was certainly a difficult test except for those 
‘rightly’ guided by Allah. And Allah would never discount your ‘previous 
acts of’ faith. Surely Allah is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to humanity. 


Order to Face Mecca in Prayer 
144. Indeed, We see you "O Prophet’ turning your face towards heaven. 
Now We will make you turn towards a direction ‘of prayer’ that will please 
you. So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ‘in Mecca—wherever 
you are, turn your faces towards it. Those who were given the Scripture 
certainly know this to be the truth from their Lord. And Allah is never 


unaware of what they do. 145. Even if you were to bring every proof to the 
People of the Book, they would not accept your direction ‘of prayer’, nor 
would you accept theirs; nor would any of them accept the direction ‘of 
prayer’ of another. And if you were to follow their desires after ‘all’ the 
knowledge that has come to you, then you would certainly be one of the 
wrongdoers. 


The Truth About the Prophet 
146. Those We have given the Scripture recognize this "Prophet" as they 
recognize their own children. Yet a group of them hides the truth 
knowingly. 147. "This is’ the truth from your Lord, so do not ever be one of 
those who doubt. 148. Everyone turns to their own direction ‘of prayer’. So 
compete with one another in doing good. Wherever you are, Allah will 
bring you all together "for judgment’. Surely Allah is Most Capable of 
everything. 
Order to Face the Sacred Mosque 

149. Wherever you are "O Prophet’, turn your face towards the Sacred 
Mosque. This is certainly the truth from your Lord. And Allah is never 
unaware of what you ‘all’ do. 150. Wherever you are "O Prophet’, turn your 
face towards the Sacred Mosque. And wherever you ‘believers’ are, face 
towards it, so that people will have no argument against you, except the 
wrongdoers among them. Do not fear them; fear Me, so that I may 
‘continue to` perfect My favour upon you and so you may be ‘rightly’ 
guided. 


Allah’s Favour upon the Believers 
151. Since We have sent you a messenger from among yourselves—reciting 
to you Our revelations, purifying you, teaching you the Book and wisdom, 
and teaching you what you never knew— 152. remember Me; I will 
remember you. And thank Me, and never be ungrateful. 


Patience in Difficult Times 
153. O believers! Seek comfort in patience and prayer. Allah is truly with 
those who are patient. 154. Never say that those martyred in the cause of 
Allah are dead—in fact, they are alive! But you do not perceive it. 155. We 
will certainly test you with a touch of fear and famine and loss of property, 
life, and crops. Give good news to those who patiently endure— 156. who, 


when faced with a disaster, say, “Surely to Allah we belong and to Him we 
will ‘all’ return.” 157. They are the ones who will receive Allah’s blessings 
and mercy. And it is they who are ‘rightly’ guided. 

A Pilgrimage Ritual 
158. Indeed, ‘the hills of’ Safa and Marwah!*2! are among the symbols of 
Allah. So whoever performs the pilgrimage or minor pilgrimage,!=2! let 


them walk between ‘the two hills’. And whoever does good willingly, Allah 
is truly Appreciative, All-Knowing. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 

159. Those who hide the clear proofs and guidance that We have revealed— 
after We made it clear for humanity in the Book—will be condemned by 
Allah and ‘all* those who condemn. 160. As for those who repent, mend 
their ways, and let the truth be known, they are the ones to whom I will turn 
"in forgiveness’, for I am the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful. 161. 
Surely those who disbelieve and die as disbelievers are condemned by 
Allah, the angels, and all of humanity. 162. They will be in Hell forever. 
Their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be delayed "from it’. 


Allah’s Great Signs 

163. Your God is ‘only’ One God. There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ 
except Him—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful. 164. Indeed, in the 
creation of the heavens and the earth; the alternation of the day and the 
night; the ships that sail the sea for the benefit of humanity; the rain sent 
down by Allah from the skies, reviving the earth after its death; the 
scattering of all kinds of creatures throughout; the shifting of the winds; and 
the clouds drifting between the heavens and the earth—'in all of this’ are 
surely signs for people of understanding. 


Associating Others with Allah 
165. Still there are some who take others as Allah’s equal—they love them 
as they should love Allah—but the ‘true’ believers love Allah even more. If 
only the wrongdoers could see the ‘horrible’ punishment ‘awaiting them’, 
they would certainly realize that all power belongs to Allah and that Allah 
is indeed severe in punishment. 


Losers Disowning Each Other 


166. ‘Consider the Day’ when those who misled others will disown their 
followers—when they face the torment—and the bonds that united them 
will be cut off. 167. The ‘misled’ followers will cry, “If only we could have 
a second chance, we would disown them as they disowned us.” And so 
Allah will make them remorseful of their misdeeds. And they will never "be 
able to` leave the Fire. 


Warning Against Satan 
168. O humanity! Eat from what is lawful and good on the earth and do not 
follow Satan’s footsteps. He is truly your sworn enemy. 169. He only incites 
you to commit evil and indecency, and to claim against Allah what you do 
not know. 


Blind Following 
170. When it is said to them, “Follow what Allah has revealed,” they reply, 
“No! We ‘only’ follow what we found our forefathers practicing.” "Would 
they still do so,’ even if their forefathers had ‘absolutely’ no understanding 
or guidance? 


Example of the Disbelievers 
171. The example of the disbelievers ‘not responding to the Messenger’s 
warning’ is like a flock not comprehending the calls and cries of the 
shepherd. "They are wilfully’ deaf, dumb and blind so they have no 
understanding. 


Forbidden Foods 
172. O believers! Eat from the good things We have provided for you. And 
give thanks to Allah if you ‘truly’ worship Him ‘alone’. 173. He has only 
forbidden you ‘to eat’ carrion, blood, swine,4! and what is slaughtered in 
the name of any other than Allah. But if someone is compelled by necessity 
—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate need—they will not be 
sinful. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Hiding the Truth 
174. Indeed, those who hide Allah’s revelations, trading them for a fleeting 
gain consume nothing but fire into their bellies. Allah will neither speak to 
them on the Day of Judgment, nor will He purify them. And they will suffer 
a painful punishment. 175. They are the ones who trade guidance for 
misguidance and forgiveness for punishment. How persistent are they in 


pursuit of the Fire! 176. That is because Allah has revealed the Book in 
truth. And surely those who differ regarding it are totally engrossed in 
opposition. 


True Righteousness 

177. Righteousness is not in turning your faces towards the east or the west. 
Rather, the righteous are those who believe in Allah, the Last Day, the 
angels, the Books, and the prophets; who give charity out of their cherished 
wealth to relatives, orphans, the poor, ‘needy’ travellers, beggars, and for 
freeing captives; who establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and keep the pledges 
they make; and who are patient in times of suffering, adversity, and in ‘the 
heat of" battle. It is they who are true ‘in faith’, and it is they who are 
mindful ‘of Allah’. 


Law of Retaliation!=2! 

178. O believers! "The law of’ retaliation is set for you in cases of murder— 
a free man for a free man, a slave for a slave, and a female for a female.!28! 
But if the offender is pardoned by the victim’s guardian,'22! then blood- 
money should be decided fairly'®®! and payment should be made 
courteously. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord. But whoever 
transgresses after that will suffer a painful punishment. 179. There is 
“security of’ life for you in ‘the law of" retaliation, O people of reason, so 
that you may become mindful "of Allah’. 


Last Will and Bequests 
180. It is prescribed that when death approaches any of you—if they leave 
something of value—a will should be made in favour of parents and 
immediate family with faimness.'°2! "This is* an obligation on those who are 
mindful "of Allah’. 181. But whoever changes the will after hearing it,!®2! 
the blame will only be on those who made the change. Indeed, Allah is All- 
Hearing, All-Knowing. 182. Whoever suspects an error or an injustice in 
the will and brings about a ‘fair’ settlement among the parties will not be 
sinful. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 
Rules of Fasting 

183. O believers! Fasting is prescribed for you—as it was for those before 
you'®!!_s9 perhaps you will become mindful "of Allah’. 184. "Fast a” 
prescribed number of days.'®2! But whoever of you is ill or on a journey, 


then ‘let them fast? an equal number of days ‘after Ramadan’. For those 
who can only fast with extreme difficulty,'®2! compensation can be made by 
feeding a needy person ‘for every day not fasted’. But whoever volunteers 
to give more, it is better for them. And to fast is better for you, if only you 
knew. 


Excellence of Ramadan 

185. Ramadan is the month in which the Quran was revealed as a guide for 
humanity with clear proofs of guidance and the standard ‘to distinguish 
between right and wrong’. So whoever is present this month, let them fast. 
But whoever is ill or on a journey, then ‘let them fast’ an equal number of 
days "after Ramadan’. Allah intends ease for you, not hardship, so that you 
may complete the prescribed period and proclaim the greatness of Allah for 
guiding you, and perhaps you will be grateful. 


Allah Is Always Near 
186. When My servants ask you "O Prophet’ about Me: I am truly near. I 
respond to one’s prayer when they call upon Me. So let them respond ‘with 
obedience’ to Me and believe in Me, perhaps they will be guided ‘to the 
Right Way’. 
Intimacy During the Nights of Ramadan 
187. It has been made permissible for you to be intimate with your wives 
during the nights preceding the fast. Your spouses are a garment'®4! for you 
as you are for them. Allah knows that you were deceiving yourselves.'©! So 
He has accepted your repentance and pardoned you. So now you may be 
intimate with them and seek what Allah has prescribed for you.!®2! "you 
may’ eat and drink until you see the light of dawn breaking the darkness of 
night, then complete the fast until nightfall. Do not be intimate with your 
spouses while you are meditating in the mosques. These are the limits set 
by Allah, so do not exceed them. This is how Allah makes His revelations 
clear to people, so they may become mindful ‘of Him’. 
Warning Against Injustice 
188. Do not consume one another’s wealth unjustly, nor deliberately bribe 
authorities in order to devour a portion of others’ property, knowing that it 
is asin. 


True Righteousness 


189. They ask you "O Prophet’ about the phases of the moon. Say, “They 
are a means for people to determine time and pilgrimage.” Righteousness is 
not in entering your houses from the back doors.!£2! Rather, righteousness is 
to be mindful ‘of Allah’. So enter your homes through their ‘proper’ doors, 
and be mindful of Allah so you may be successful. 


Etiquette of Fighting Enemy Combatants 

190. Fight in the cause of Allah ‘only’ against those who wage war against 
you, but do not exceed the limits.'S8! Surely Allah does not like 
transgressors. 191. Kill them wherever you come upon theml?! and drive 
them out of the places from which they have driven you out. For 
persecution!! is far worse than killing. And do not fight them at the Sacred 
Mosque unless they attack you there. If they do so, then fight them—that is 
the reward of the disbelievers. 192. But if they cease, then surely Allah is 
All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Resisting Oppression 

193. Fight against them ‘if they persecute you’ until there is no more 
persecution, and ‘your’ devotion will be to Allah ‘alone’. If they stop 
"persecuting you’, let there be no hostility except against the aggressors. 
194. "There will be retaliation in’ a sacred month for ‘an offence in’ a sacred 
month,!2) and all violations will bring about retaliation. So, if anyone 
attacks you, retaliate in the same manner. ‘But’ be mindful of Allah, and 
know that Allah is with those mindful ‘of Him’. 195. Spend in the cause of 
Allah and do not let your own hands throw you into destruction "by 
withholding’. And do good, for Allah certainly loves the good-doers. 


Some Pilgrimage Rituals 
196. Complete the pilgrimage and minor pilgrimage for Allah.'22! But if 
prevented ‘from proceeding’, then ‘offer’ whatever sacrificial animals you 
can afford. And do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal reaches 
its destination. But if any of you is ill or has a scalp ailment ‘requiring 
shaving’, then compensate either by fasting, charity, or a sacrificial offering. 
In times of peace, you may combine the pilgrimage and minor pilgrimage 
then make the sacrificial offering you can afford. Whoever cannot afford 
that ‘offering’, let them fast three days during pilgrimage and seven after 
returning "home’—completing ten. These offerings are for those who do not 


live near the Sacred House. And be mindful of Allah, and know that Allah 
is severe in punishment. 


More Pilgrimage Rituals 

197. ‘Commitment to’ pilgrimage is made in appointed months. 
Whoever commits to ‘performing’ pilgrimage, let them stay away from 
intimate relations, foul language, and arguments during pilgrimage. 
Whatever good you do, Allah ‘fully’ knows of it. Take ‘necessary’ 
provisions ‘for the journey’—surely the best provision is righteousness. 
And be mindful of Me, O people of reason! 198. There is no blame on you 
for seeking the bounty of your Lord ‘during this journey’!4! When you 
return from ’Arafat,'2! praise Allah near the sacred place!Z®! and praise 
Him for having guided you, for surely before this ‘guidance’ you were 
astray. 199. Then go forth with the rest of the pilgrims. And seek Allah’s 
forgiveness. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Praying for the Best of Both Worlds 

200. When you have fulfilled your sacred rites, praise Allah as you used to 
praise your forefathers "before Islam’, or even more passionately. There are 
some who say, “Our Lord! Grant us "Your bounties’ in this world,” but they 
will have no share in the Hereafter. 201. Yet there are others who say, “Our 
Lord! Grant us the good of this world and the Hereafter, and protect us from 
the torment of the Fire.” 202. It is they who will receive a "heavenly" reward 
for the good they have done. Surely Allah is swift in reckoning.!! 


[73] 


More Pilgrimage Rituals 
203. And remember Allah during ‘these’ appointed days.'2! Whoever 
departs swiftly on the second day is not sinful, neither are those who stay 
behind ‘till the third—seeking additional reward’, so long as they are 
mindful ‘of their Lord’. And be mindful of Allah, and know that to Him you 
will ‘all’ be gathered. 


Those Who Spread Mischief 
204. There are some ‘hypocrites’ who impress you with their views 
regarding worldly affairs and openly call upon Allah to witness what is in 
their hearts, yet they are your worst adversaries. 205. And when they leave 
"you, [2] they strive throughout the land to spread mischief in it and destroy 
crops and cattle. Allah does not like mischief. 206. When it is said to them, 


“Fear Allah,” pride carries them off to sin. Hell will be their proper place. 
What an evil place to rest! 207. And there are those who would dedicate 
their lives to Allah’s pleasure. And Allah is Ever Gracious to ‘His’ servants. 


Warning Against the Devil 
208. O believers! Enter into Islam wholeheartedly and do not follow Satan’s 
footsteps. Surely he is your sworn enemy. 209. If you falter after receiving 
the clear proofs, then know that Allah is indeed Almighty, All-Wise. 


Waiting for Judgment? 
210. Are they waiting for Allah Himself’ to come to them in the shade of 
clouds, along with the angels? "If He did’, then the matter would be settled 
"at once’. And to Allah ‘all’ matters will be returned ‘for judgment’. 211. 
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We have given them. And 
whoever trades Allah’s favour—after receiving it— for disbelief’ should 
know that Allah is indeed severe in punishment. 


Life as a Test 
212. The life of this world has been made appealing to the disbelievers, and 
they mock the believers. Those who are mindful ‘of Allah’ will rank above 
them on the Day of Judgment. And Allah provides for whoever He wills 
without limit. 


Why Prophets Were Sent 

213. Humanity had once been one community ‘of believers before they lost 
faith’, Then Allah raised prophets as deliverers of good news and as 
warners, and revealed to them the Scriptures in truth to judge among people 
regarding their disputes. And no one disputed the Scriptures except the very 
people who received them after clear proofs had come to them—out of 
jealousy. Then Allah, by His grace, has guided the believers to the truth 
regarding those disputes. And Allah guides whoever He wills to the Straight 
Path. 


Faith Reinforced by Affliction 
214. Do you think you will be admitted into Paradise without being tested 
like those before you? They were afflicted with suffering and adversity and 
were so ‘violently’ shaken that "even’ the Messenger and the believers with 
him cried out, “When will Allah’s help come?” Indeed, Allah’s help is 
always’ near. 


Charity Begins at Home 
215. They ask you "O Prophet in’ what ‘way’ they should donate. Say, 
“Whatever donations you give are for parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, 
and ‘needy’ travellers. Whatever good you do is certainly well known to 
Allah.” 

Fighting in Self-Defence 
216. Fighting has been made obligatory upon you ‘believers’, though you 
dislike it. Perhaps you dislike something which is good for you and like 
something which is bad for you. Allah knows and you do not know. 


Fighting in the Sacred Months 

217. They'®2! ask you "O Prophet" about fighting in the sacred months.!®!! 
Say, “Fighting during these months is a great sin. But hindering ‘others’ 
from the Path of Allah, rejecting Him, and expelling the worshippers from 
the Sacred Mosque is ‘a’ greater ‘sin’ in the sight of Allah. For 
persecution!®2! is far worse than killing. And they will not stop fighting you 
until they turn you away from your faith—if they can. And whoever among 
you renounces their own faith and dies a disbeliever, their deeds will 
become void in this life and in the Hereafter. It is they who will be the 
residents of the Fire. They will be there forever.”!83! 


Reward of the Devout 
218. Surely those who have believed, emigrated, and struggled in the Way 
of Allah—they can hope for Allah’s mercy. And Allah is All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful. 


Questions to the Prophet 

219. They ask you "O Prophet’ about intoxicants and gambling. Say, “There 
is great evil in both, as well as some benefit for people—but the evil 
outweighs the benefit.”!84! They "also ask you what they should donate. 
Say, “Whatever you can spare.” This is how Allah makes His revelations 
clear to you ‘believers’, so perhaps you may reflect 220. upon this world 
and the Hereafter. And they ask you concerning orphans. Say, “Improving 
their condition is best. And if you partner with them, they are bonded with 
you "in faith’.!82! And Allah knows who intends harm and who intends 
good. Had Allah willed, He could have made it difficult for you.!®®] Surely 
Allah is Almighty, All-Wise.” 


Marrying Believers 

221. Do not marry polytheistic women until they believe; for a believing 
slave-woman is better than a free polytheist, even though she may look 
pleasant to you. And do not marry your women to polytheistic men until 
they believe, for a believing slave-man is better than a free polytheist, even 
though he may look pleasant to you. They invite ‘you’ to the Fire while 
Allah invites "you" to Paradise and forgiveness by His grace.'®2! He makes 
His revelations clear to the people so perhaps they will be mindful. 


Intercourse During Menstruation 

222. They ask you "O Prophet’ about menstruation. Say, “Beware of its 
harm! So keep away, and do not have intercourse with your wives during 
their monthly cycles until they are purified.'!88! When they purify 
themselves, then you may approach them in the manner specified by Allah. 
Surely Allah loves those who always turn to Him in repentance and those 
who purify themselves.” 223. Your wives are like farmland for you,!®2! so 
approach them "consensually" as you please.'22! And send forth something 
good for yourselves.'2!! Be mindful of Allah, and know that you will meet 
Him. And give good news to the believers. 


Rules Regarding Oaths 
224. Do not use Allah’s Name in your oaths as an excuse for not doing 
good, not guarding against evil, or not making peace between people. And 
Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 225. Allah will not hold you 
accountable for unintentional oaths, but for what you intended in your 
hearts. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing. 


Vowing Not to Touch One’s Own Wife 
226. Those who swear not to have intercourse with their wives must wait 
for four months.'22! If they change their mind, then Allah is certainly All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 227. But if they settle on divorce, then Allah is 
indeed All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Waiting Period After Divorce 
228. Divorced women must wait three monthly cycles "before they can re- 
marry’. It is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has created in their 
wombs,'23! if they "truly" believe in Allah and the Last Day. And their 
husbands reserve the right to take them back within that period if they 


desire reconciliation. Women have rights similar to those of men equitably, 
although men have a degree ‘of responsibility’ above them. And Allah is 
Almighty, All-Wise. 


Proper Way to Divorce 
229. Divorce may be retracted twice, then the husband must retain ‘his 
wife” with honour or separate "from her’ with grace.'%4! It is not lawful for 
husbands to take back anything of the dowry given to their wives, unless 
the couple fears not being able to keep within the limits of Allah.!22! So if 
you fear they will not be able to keep within the limits of Allah, there is no 
blame if the wife compensates the husband to obtain divorce.'26! These are 
the limits set by Allah, so do not transgress them. And whoever transgresses 
the limits of Allah, they are the ‘true’ wrongdoers. 


Husband Remarrying His Ex-Wife 
230. So if a husband divorces his wife ‘three times’, then it is not lawful for 
him to remarry her until after she has married another man and then is 
divorced. Then it is permissible for them to reunite, as long as they feel they 
are able to maintain the limits of Allah. These are the limits set by Allah, 
which He makes clear for people of knowledge. 


Etiquette of Divorce 
231. When you divorce women and they have ‘almost’ reached the end of 
their waiting period, either retain them honourably or let them go 
honourably. But do not retain them ‘only’ to harm them ‘or’ to take 
advantage ‘of them’. Whoever does that surely wrongs his own soul. Do not 
take Allah’s revelations lightly. Remember Allah’s favours upon you as 
well as the Book and wisdom!22! He has sent down for your guidance. Be 
mindful of Allah, and know that Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


Remarrying One’s Ex-Spouse 
232. When you have divorced women and they have reached the end of 
their waiting period, do not prevent them from re-marrying their ex- 
husbands if they come to an honourable agreement. This is enjoined on 
whoever has faith in Allah and the Last Day. This is purer and more 
dignifying for you. Allah knows and you do not know. 


Nursing Children After Divorce 


233. ‘Divorced’ mothers will breastfeed their offspring for two whole years, 
for those who wish to complete the nursing ‘of their child’. The child’s 
father will provide reasonable maintenance and clothing for the mother 
‘during that period’. No one will be charged with more than they can bear. 
No mother or father should be made to suffer for their child. The ‘father’s’ 
heirs are under the same obligation. But if both sides decide—after mutual 
consultation and consent—to wean a child, then there is no blame on them. 
And if you decide to have your children nursed by a wet-nurse, it is 
permissible as long as you pay fairly. Be mindful of Allah, and know that 
Allah is All-Seeing of what you do. 
Widows’ Waiting Period 

234. As for those of you who die and leave widows behind, let them 
observe a waiting period of four months and ten days. When they have 
reached the end of this period, then you! 28! are not accountable for what 
they decide for themselves in a reasonable manner. And Allah is All-Aware 
of what you do. 


Proposing to Widowed or Divorced Women 

235. There is no blame on you for subtly showing interest in ‘divorced or 
widowed" women!®! or for hiding ‘the intention’ in your hearts. Allah 
knows that you are considering them ‘for marriage’. But do not make a 
secret commitment with them—you can only show interest in them 
appropriately. Do not commit to the bond of marriage until the waiting 
period expires. Know that Allah is aware of what is in your hearts, so 
beware of Him. And know that Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing. 


Divorce Before Consummation 

236. There is no blame if you divorce women before the marriage is 
consummated or the dowry is settled. But give them a ‘suitable’ 
compensation—the rich according to his means and the poor according to 
his. A reasonable compensation is an obligation on the good-doers. 237. 
And if you divorce them before consummating the marriage but after 
deciding on a dowry, pay half of the dowry, unless the wife graciously 
waives it or the husband graciously pays in full. Graciousness is closer to 
righteousness. And do not forget kindness among yourselves. Surely Allah 
is All-Seeing of what you do. 


Observing Prayers! 4201 
238. Observe the ‘five obligatory’ prayers—especially the middle 
prayer!421!__and stand in true devotion to Allah. 239. If you are in danger, 
pray on foot or while riding. But when you are safe, ‘take time to’ 
remember Allah for teaching you what you did not know. 


Widows’ Original Waiting Period 
240. Those of you who die leaving widows should bequeath for them a 
year’s maintenance without forcing them out.'422! But if they choose to 
leave, you are not accountable for what they reasonably decide for 
themselves. And Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 


Care for Divorced Women 
241. Reasonable provisions must be made for divorced women—a duty on 
those mindful ‘of Allah’. 242. This is how Allah makes His revelations 
clear to you, so perhaps you will understand. 


Sacrifices in Allah’s Cause 

243. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen those who fled their homes in the 
thousands for fear of death?!222! Allah said to them, “Die!” then He gave 
them life. Surely Allah is ever Bountiful to humanity, but most people are 
ungrateful. 244, Fight in the cause of Allah, and know that Allah is All- 
Hearing, All-Knowing. 245. Who will lend to Allah a good loan which 
Allah will multiply many times over? It is Allah “alone’ who decreases and 
increases ‘wealth’. And to Him you will ‘all’ be returned. 


Prophet Samuel 

246. Have you not seen those chiefs of the Children of Israel after Moses? 
They said to one of their prophets, “Appoint for us a king, ‘and’ we will 
fight in the cause of Allah.” He said, “Are you not going to cower if ordered 
to fight?” They replied, “How could we refuse to fight in the cause of 
Allah, while we were driven out of our homes and ‘separated from’ our 
children?” But when they were ordered to fight, they fled, except for a few 
of them. And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of the wrongdoers. 


King Saul 
247. Their prophet told them, “Allah has appointed Saul!!°4! to be your 
king.” They protested, “How can he be our king when some of us are more 
deserving of kingship than he, and he has not been blessed with vast 


riches?” He replied, “Allah has chosen him over you and blessed him with 
knowledge and stature. Allah grants kingship to whoever He wills. And 
Allah is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing.” 248. Their prophet further told them, 
“The sign of Saul’s kingship is that the Ark will come to you—containing 
reassurance!25! from your Lord and relics of the family of Moses and the 
family of Aaron,!125! which will be carried by the angels. Surely in this is a 
sign for you, if you ‘truly’ believe.” 


Saul’s Victory 

249. When Saul marched forth with his army, he cautioned: “Allah will test 
you with a river. So whoever drinks ‘his fill’ from it is not with me, and 
whoever does not taste it—except a sip from the hollow of his hands—is 
definitely with me.” They all drank ‘their fill’ except for a few! When he 
and the ‘remaining’ faithful with him crossed the river, they said, “Now we 
are no match for Goliath and his warriors.” But those "believers’ who were 
certain they would meet Allah reasoned, “How many times has a small 
force vanquished a mighty army by the Will of Allah! And Allah is ‘always’ 
with the steadfast.” 


David Kills Goliath 
250. When they advanced to face Goliath and his warriors, they prayed, 
“Our Lord! Shower us with perseverance, make our steps firm, and give us 
victory over the disbelieving people.” 251. So they defeated them by 
Allah’s Will, and David killed Goliath. And Allah blessed David with 
kingship and wisdom and taught him what He willed. Had Allah not 
repelled a group of people by ‘the might of" another, corruption would have 
dominated the earth, but Allah is Gracious to all. 252. These are Allah’s 
revelations which We recite to you "O Prophet’ in truth. And you are truly 
one of the messengers. 
Some Messengers Raised in Rank 

253. We have chosen some of those messengers above others.!12Z! Allah 
spoke directly to some, and raised some high in rank. To Jesus, son of Mary, 
We gave clear proofs and supported him with the holy spirit.!228! If Allah 
had willed, succeeding generations would not have fought ‘among 
themselves’ after receiving the clear proofs. But they differed—some 


believed while others disbelieved. Yet if Allah had willed, they would not 
have fought one another. But Allah does what He wills. 


Spending in Allah’s Way 
254. O believers! Donate from what We have provided for you before the 
arrival of a Day when there will be no bargaining,!422! friendship, ®! or 
intercession. Those who disbelieve are ‘truly’ the wrongdoers. 


One True God 

255. Allah! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him, the Ever- 
Living, All-Sustaining. Neither drowsiness nor sleep overtakes Him. To 
Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Who 
could possibly intercede with Him without His permission? He ‘fully’ 
knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them, but no one can grasp 
any of His knowledge—except what He wills ‘to reveal’. His Seat!!!) 
encompasses the heavens and the earth, and the preservation of both does 
not tire Him. For He is the Most High, the Greatest.!22! 


Free Will in Accepting Islam 

256. Let there be no compulsion in religion, for the truth stands out clearly 
from falsehood.'3! So whoever renounces false gods and believes in Allah 
has certainly grasped the firmest, unfailing hand-hold. And Allah is All- 
Hearing, All-Knowing. 257. Allah is the Guardian of the believers—He 
brings them out of darkness and into light. As for the disbelievers, their 
guardians are false gods who lead them out of light and into darkness. It is 
they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there forever. 


Abraham and the Arrogant King 

258. Are you "O Prophet’ not aware of the one who argued with Abraham 
about his Lord because Allah had granted him kingship? ‘Remember’ when 
Abraham said, “My Lord is the One Who has power to give life and cause 
death.” He argued, “I too have the power to give life and cause death.” 
Abraham challenged ‘him’, “Allah causes the sun to rise from the east. So 
make it rise from the west.” And so the disbeliever was dumbstruck. And 
Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people. 


Story of Ezra 
259. Or ‘are you not aware of’ the one who passed by a city which was in 
ruins. He wondered, “How could Allah bring this back to life after its 


destruction?” So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years then brought 
him back to life. Allah asked, “How long have you remained ‘in this 
state?” He replied, “Perhaps a day or part of a day.” Allah said, “No! You 
have remained here for a hundred years! Just look at your food and drink— 
they have not spoiled. "But now’ look at ‘the remains of’ your donkey! And 
"so` We have made you into a sign for humanity. And look at the bones ‘of 
the donkey’, how We bring them together then clothe them with flesh!” H4 
When this was made clear to him, he declared, ““Now’ I know that Allah is 
Most Capable of everything.” 


Abraham Inquiring About Resurrection 
260. And ‘remember’ when Abraham said, “My Lord! Show me how you 
give life to the dead.” Allah responded, “Do you not believe?” Abraham 
replied, “Yes I do, but just so my heart can be reassured.” Allah said, “Then 
bring four birds, train them to come to you, ‘then cut them into pieces,’ and 
scatter them on different hilltops. Then call them back, they will fly to you 
in haste. And ‘so you will’ know that Allah is Almighty, All-Wise.” 


Multiplied Rewards for Charity 
261. The example of those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah is 
that of a grain that sprouts into seven ears, each bearing one hundred grains. 
And Allah multiplies ‘the reward even more’ to whoever He wills. For 
Allah is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing. 


Sincere Charity 
262. Those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah and do not follow 
their charity with reminders of their generosity or hurtful words—they will 
get their reward from their Lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will 
they grieve. 263. Kind words and forgiveness are better than charity 
followed by injury. And Allah is Self-Sufficient, Most Forbearing. 


Parable for Wasted Charity 
264. O believers! Do not waste your charity with reminders ‘of your 
generosity’ or hurtful words, like those who donate their wealth just to show 
off and do not believe in Allah or the Last Day. Their example is that of a 
hard barren rock covered with a thin layer of soil hit by a strong rain— 
leaving it just a bare stone. Such people are unable to preserve the reward of 
their charity. Allah does not guide ‘such’ disbelieving people. 


Parable for Accepted Charity 
265. And the example of those who donate their wealth, seeking Allah’s 
pleasure and believing the reward is certain,'2! is that of a garden on a 
fertile hill: when heavy rain falls, it yields up twice its normal produce. If 
no heavy rain falls, a drizzle is sufficient. And Allah is All-Seeing of what 
you do. 


Wasted Reward 
266. Would any of you wish to have a garden with palm trees, grapevines, 
and all kinds of fruits with rivers flowing underneath and as they grow very 
old with dependent children, a fiery whirlwind hits the garden, burning it all 
up? This is how Allah makes His revelations clear to you, so perhaps you 
will reflect. 


Quality Charity 
267. O believers! Donate from the best of what you have earned and of 
what We have produced for you from the earth. Do not pick out worthless 
things for donation, which you yourselves would only accept with closed 
eyes. And know that Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. 


Devil Discouraging Charity 
268. The Devil threatens you with "the prospect of’ poverty and bids you to 
the shameful deed ‘of stinginess’, while Allah promises you forgiveness and 
great’ bounties from Him. And Allah is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing. 


Wisdom as a Privilege, Not a Right 
269. Allah grants wisdom to whoever He wills. And whoever is granted 
wisdom is certainly blessed with a great privilege. But none will be mindful 
"of this’ except people of reason. 


Donating Openly and Secretly 
270. Whatever charities you give or vows you make are surely known to 
Allah. And the wrongdoers will have no helpers. 271. To give charity 
publicly is good, but to give to the poor privately is better for you, and will 
absolve you of your sins. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do.!#S! 272. 
You are not responsible for people’s guidance "O Prophet’"—it is Allah Who 
guides whoever He wills. Whatever you ‘believers’ spend in charity, it is for 
your own good—as long as you do so seeking the pleasure of Allah.! H7 


Whatever you donate will be paid back to you in full, and you will not be 
wronged. 


Caring for the Needy 

273. ‘Charity is’ for the needy who are too engaged in the cause of Allah to 
move about in the land ‘for work’. Those unfamiliar with their situation will 
think they are not in need ‘of charity’ because they do not beg. You can 
recognize them by their appearance. They do not beg people persistently. 
Whatever you give in charity is certainly well known to Allah. 274. Those 
who spend their wealth in charity day and night, secretly and openly—their 
reward is with their Lord, and there will be no fear for them, nor will they 
grieve. 


Interest Prohibited 

275. Those who consume interest will stand "on Judgment Day’ like those 
driven to madness by Satan’s touch. That is because they say, “Trade is no 
different than interest.” But Allah has permitted trading and forbidden 
interest. Whoever refrains—after having received warning from their Lord 
—may keep their previous gains, and their case is left to Allah. As for those 
who persist, it is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be 
there forever. 276. Allah has made interest fruitless and charity fruitful. And 
Allah does not like any ungrateful evildoer. 


True Believers 
277. Indeed, those who believe, do good, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax 
will receive their reward from their Lord, and there will be no fear for them, 
nor will they grieve. 


Warning Against Interest 
278. O believers! Fear Allah, and give up outstanding interest if you are 
“true” believers. 279. If you do not, then beware of a war with Allah and His 
Messenger! But if you repent, you may retain your principal—neither 
inflicting nor suffering harm. 


Kindness in Collecting Debts 
280. If it is difficult for someone to repay a debt, postpone it until a time of 
ease. And if you waive it as an act of charity, it will be better for you, if 
only you knew. 


Reminder of Judgment Day 


281. Be mindful of the Day when you will ‘all’ be returned to Allah, then 
every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be 
wronged, |418] 


Writing and Witnessing a Debt Contract 

282. O believers! When you contract a loan for a fixed period of time, 
commit it to writing. Let the scribe maintain justice between the parties. 
The scribe should not refuse to write as Allah has taught them to write. 
They will write what the debtor dictates, bearing Allah in mind and not 
defrauding the debt. If the debtor is incompetent, weak, or unable to dictate, 
let their guardian dictate for them with justice. Call upon two of your men 
to witness. If two men cannot be found, then one man and two women of 
your choice will witness—so if one of the women forgets the other may 
remind her.!H] The witnesses must not refuse when they are summoned. 
You must not be against writing ‘contracts’ for a fixed period—whether the 
sum is small or great. This is more just "for you’ in the sight of Allah, and 
more convenient to establish evidence and remove doubts. However, if you 
conduct an immediate transaction among yourselves, then there is no need 
for you to record it, but call upon witnesses when a deal is finalized. Let no 
harm come to the scribe or witnesses. If you do, then you have gravely 
exceeded ‘your limits’. Be mindful of Allah, for Allah ‘is the One Who’ 
teaches you. And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


Taking Collateral 
283. If you are on a journey and a scribe cannot be found, then a security 
can be taken. If you trust one another, then ‘there is no need for a security, 
but’ the debtor should honour this trust ‘by repaying the debt'—and let them 
fear Allah, their Lord. And do not conceal the testimony, for whoever 
conceals it, their hearts are indeed sinful. And Allah ‘fully* knows what you 
do. 
Allah’s Might 

284. To Allah “alone’ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on 
the earth. Whether you reveal what is in your hearts or conceal it, Allah will 
call you to account for it. He forgives whoever He wills, and punishes 
whoever He wills. And Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


Articles of Faith 


285. The Messenger ‘firmly’ believes in what has been revealed to him 
from his Lord, and so do the believers. They ‘all’ believe in Allah, His 
angels, His Books, and His messengers. “They proclaim,’ “We make no 
distinction between any of His messengers.” And they say, “We hear and 
obey. "We seek’ Your forgiveness, our Lord! And to You ‘alone’ is the final 
return.” 


Prayer for Grace 
286. Allah does not require of any soul more than what it can afford. All 
good will be for its own benefit, and all evil will be to its own loss. "The 
believers pray,’ “Our Lord! Do not punish us if we forget or make a 
mistake. Our Lord! Do not place a burden on us like the one you placed on 
those before us. Our Lord! Do not burden us with what we cannot bear. 
Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our ‘only’ Guardian. 
So grant us victory over the disbelieving people.” 
oie ok ake 


3. The Family of ’Imran 
(Ali-’ Imran) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name from the Family of ’Imrân mentioned in 
verse 33. Like the previous sûrah, it reiterates the fact that Allah is the 
source of divine revelation and affirms the belief in Allah as the only Lord 
and Islam as His only accepted religion. The story of the birth of Mary, 
John the Baptist, and Jesus is mengigned, along with a challenge to the 
Christian perception of Jesus ( .{z-/;). The sûrah also touches on early 
battles against the Meccan mG with emphasis on the lessons to be 
drawn from the Muslims’ defeat at the Battle of Uhud, which took place in 
3 A.H./625 C.E. The virtue of being mindful of Allah is highlighted at the 
end of this stirah and the beginning of the next one. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Scriptures as a Source of Guidance 

1. Alif-Lam-Mim,. 2. Allah! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him 
—the Ever-Living, All-Sustaining. 3. He has revealed to you "O Prophet’ 
the Book in truth, confirming what came before it, as He revealed the Torah 
and the Gospel 4. previously, as a guide for people, and ‘also’ revealed the 
Standard "to distinguish between right and wrong’.!!22! Surely those who 
reject Allah’s revelations will suffer a severe torment. For Allah is 
Almighty, capable of punishment. 


Allah Almighty 
5. Surely nothing on earth or in the heavens is hidden from Allah. 6. He is 
the One Who shapes you in the wombs of your mothers as He wills. There 
is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him—the Almighty, All-Wise. 


Precise and Elusive Verses 
7. He is the One Who has revealed to you "O Prophet’ the Book, of which 
some verses are precise—they are the foundation of the Book—while 
others are elusive.'42!! Those with deviant hearts follow the elusive verses 
seeking ‘to spread’ doubt through their ‘false’ interpretations—but none 
grasps their ‘full’ meaning except Allah. As for those well-grounded in 


knowledge, they say, “We believe in this ‘Quran’—it is all from our Lord.” 
But none will be mindful ‘of this’ except people of reason. 8. “They say,’ 
“Our Lord! Do not let our hearts deviate after you have guided us. Grant us 
Your mercy. You are indeed the Giver ‘of all bounties’. 9. Our Lord! You 
will certainly gather all humanity for the ‘promised’ Day—about which 
there is no doubt. Surely Allah does not break His promise.” 


Punishment of the Disbelievers 
10. Indeed, neither the wealth nor children!!22! of the disbelievers will be of 
any benefit to them against Allah—and they will be the fuel for the Fire. 11. 
Their fate will be like that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them 
—they all rejected Our signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. And Allah 
is severe in punishment. 12. "O Prophet!" Tell the disbelievers, “Soon you 
will be overpowered and driven to Hell—what an evil place to rest!” 


Allah’s Help at the Battle of Badr!4231 
13. Indeed, there was a sign for you in the two armies that met in battle— 
one fighting for the cause of Allah and the other in denial. The believers 
saw their enemy twice their number./24! But Allah supports with His 
victory whoever He wills. Surely in this is a lesson for people of insight. 


Temporary Pleasures 
14. The enjoyment of ‘worldly’ desires—women, children,!122! treasures of 
gold and silver, fine horses, cattle, and fertile land—has been made 
appealing to people. These are the pleasures of this worldly life, but with 
Allah is the finest destination. 


Everlasting Delight 
15. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Shall I inform you of what is better than ‘all of" this? 
Those mindful ‘of Allah’ will have Gardens with their Lord under which 
rivers flow, to stay there forever, and pure spouses,!!2°! along with Allah’s 
pleasure.” And Allah is All-Seeing of "His" servants, 16. who pray, “Our 
Lord! We have believed, so forgive our sins and protect us from the torment 
of the Fire.” 17. ‘It is they’ who are patient, sincere, obedient, and 
charitable, and who pray for forgiveness before dawn.!122! 
One God 


18. Allah "Himself" is a Witness that there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ 
except Him—and so are the angels and people of knowledge. He is the 


Maintainer of justice. There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him—the 
Almighty, All-Wise. 


One Way 

19. Certainly, Allah’s only Way is Islam.'!28! Those who were given the 
Scripture did not dispute ‘among themselves’ out of mutual envy until 
knowledge came to them.'!22! Whoever denies Allah’s signs, then surely 
Allah is swift in reckoning. 20. So if they argue with you "O Prophet’, say, 
“T have submitted myself to Allah, and so have my followers.” And ask 
those who were given the Scripture and the illiterate “people’,!2°! “Have 
you submitted yourselves ‘to Allah"?” If they submit, they will be ‘rightly’ 
guided. But if they turn away, then your duty is only to deliver ‘the 
message’. And Allah is All-Seeing of "His’ servants. 


Reward of the Rebellious 
21. Indeed, those who deny Allah’s signs, kill the prophets unjustly, and kill 
people who stand up for justice—give them good news of a painful 
punishment. 22. They are the ones whose deeds are wasted in this world 
and the Hereafter. And they will have no helpers. 


Rejecting Allah’s Judgment 

23. Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Scriptures? 
[131] Yet when they are invited to the Book of Allah to settle their disputes, 
some of them turn away heedlessly. 24. This is because they say, “The Fire 
will not touch us except for a few days.” They have been deceived in their 
faith by their wishful lying. 25. But how ‘horrible’ will it be when We 
gather them together on the Day about which there is no doubt—when 
every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be 
wronged! 


Allah’s Infinite Power 

26. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O Allah! Lord over all authorities! You give 
authority to whoever You please and remove it from who You please; You 
honour whoever You please and disgrace who You please—all good is in 
Your Hands. Surely You ‘alone’ are Most Capable of everything. 27. You 
cause the night to pass into the day and the day into the night. You bring 
forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. And You 
provide for whoever You will without limit.” 


Taking Disbelievers as Guardians!4321. 
28. Believers should not take disbelievers as guardians instead of the 
believers—and whoever does so will have nothing to hope for from Allah— 
unless it is a precaution against their tyranny. And Allah warns you about 
Himself. And to Allah is the final return. 


Allah’s Infinite Knowledge 
29. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Whether you conceal what is in your hearts or reveal 
it, it is known to Allah. For He knows whatever is in the heavens and 
whatever is on the earth. And Allah is Most Capable of everything.” 


Accountability for Good and Evil 
30. “Watch for’ the Day when every soul will be presented with whatever 
good it has done. And it will wish that its misdeeds were far off. And Allah 
warns you about Himself. And Allah is Ever Gracious to "His" servants. 


Obeying Allah and His Messenger 
31. Say, "O Prophet,’ “If you ‘sincerely’ love Allah, then follow me; Allah 
will love you and forgive your sins. For Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful.” 32. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Obey Allah and His Messenger.” If they 
still turn away, then truly Allah does not like the disbelievers. 


Blessed People 
33. Indeed, Allah chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and the 
family of Imran above all people ‘of their time’. 34. They are descendants 
of one another. And Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Birth of Mary 
35. ‘Remember’ when the wife of Imran said, “My Lord! I dedicate what is 
in my womb entirely to Your service,'422! so accept it from me. You “alone” 
are truly the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.” 36. When she delivered, she said, 
“My Lord! I have given birth to a girl,’—and Allah fully knew what she 
had delivered—‘and the male is not like the female.!424! I have named her 
Mary, and I seek Your protection for her and her offspring from Satan, the 
accursed.”!!35! 37, So her Lord accepted her graciously and blessed her with 
a pleasant upbringing—entrusting her to the care of Zachariah. Whenever 
Zachariah visited her in the sanctuary, he found her supplied with 
provisions. He exclaimed, “O Mary! Where did this come from?” She 


replied, “It is from Allah. Surely Allah provides for whoever He wills 
without limit.” 


Birth of John the Baptist 
38. Then and there Zachariah prayed to his Lord, saying, “My Lord! Grant 
me—by your grace—righteous offspring. You are certainly the Hearer of 
‘all’ prayers.” 39. So the angels called out to him while he stood praying in 
the sanctuary, “Allah gives you good news of ‘the birth of’ John who will 
confirm the Word of Allah and will be a great leader, chaste, and a prophet 
among the righteous.” 40. Zachariah exclaimed, “My Lord! How can I have 
a son when I am very old and my wife is barren?” He replied, “So will it be. 
Allah does what He wills.” 41. Zachariah said, “My Lord! Grant me a 
sign.” He said, “Your sign is that you will not "be able to` speak to people 
for three days except through gestures. Remember your Lord often and 
glorify "Him* morning and evening.” 
Mary Chosen over All Women 

42. And ‘remember’ when the angels said, “O Mary! Surely Allah has 
selected you, purified you, and chosen you over all women of the world. 43. 
O Mary! Be devout to your Lord, prostrate yourself "in prayer’ and bow 
along with those who bow down.” 44. This is news of the unseen that We 
reveal to you "O Prophet’. You were not with them when they cast lots to 
decide who would be Mary’s guardian, nor were you there when they 
argued ‘about it’. 


Birth of Jesus Christ 

45. "Remember’ when the angels proclaimed, “O Mary! Allah gives you 
good news of a Word!426! from Him, his name will be the Messiah,!422! 
Jesus, son of Mary; honoured in this world and the Hereafter, and he will be 
one of those nearest ‘to Allah’. 46. And he will speak to people in ‘his’ 
infancy and adulthood and will be one of the righteous.” 47. Mary 
wondered, “My Lord! How can I have a child when no man has ever 
touched me?” An angel replied, “So will it be. Allah creates what He wills. 
When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, ‘Be!’ And it is! 


The Mission and Miracles of Jesus 
48. “And Allah will teach him writing and wisdom, the Torah and the 
Gospel, 49. and ‘make him" a messenger to the Children of Israel ‘to 


proclaim,’ ‘I have come to you with a sign from your Lord: I will make for 
you a bird from clay, breathe into it, and it will become a ‘real’ bird—by 
Allah’s Will. I will heal the blind and the leper and raise the dead to life— 
by Allah’s Will. And I will prophesize what you eat and store in your 
houses. Surely in this is a sign for you if you ‘truly’ believe. 50. And I will 
confirm the Torah revealed before me and legalize some of what had been 
forbidden to you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, so be 
mindful of Allah and obey me. 51. Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord. 
So worship Him ‘alone’. This is the Straight Path.’” 


The Disciples 
52. When Jesus sensed disbelief from his people, he asked, “Who will stand 
up with me for Allah?” The disciples replied, “We will stand up for Allah. 
We believe in Allah, so bear witness that we have submitted.” 53. ‘They 
prayed to Allah,’ “Our Lord! We believe in Your revelations and follow the 
messenger, so count us among those who bear witness.” 


Conspiracy Against Jesus 
54. And the disbelievers made a plan ‘against Jesus’, but Allah also planned 
—and Allah is the best of planners. 55. "Remember" when Allah said, “O 
Jesus! I will take you'!®8! and raise you up to Myself. I will deliver you 
from those who disbelieve, and elevate your followers above the 
disbelievers until the Day of Judgment. Then to Me you will ‘all’ return, 
and I will settle all your disputes. 


Fair Reward 
56. “As for those who disbelieve, I will subject them to a severe punishment 
in this life and the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers. 57. And as for 
those who believe and do good, they will be rewarded in full. And Allah 
does not like the wrongdoers.” 58. We recite “all” this to you "O Prophet’ as 
one of the signs!429! and ‘as’ a wise reminder. 

Jesus and Adam 

59. Indeed, the example of Jesus in the sight of Allah is like that of Adam. 
He created him from dust, then said to him, “Be!” And he was! 60. This is 
the truth from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt. 


Disputes over Jesus 


61. Now, whoever disputes with you "O Prophet’ concerning Jesus after full 
knowledge has come to you, say, “Come! Let us gather our children and 
your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves— 
then let us sincerely invoke Allah’s curse upon the liars.” 62. Certainly, this 
is the true narrative, and there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Allah. 
And indeed, Allah ‘alone’ is the Almighty, All-Wise. 63. If they turn away, 
then surely Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of the corruptors. 


Devotion to Allah Alone 
64. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O People of the Book! Let us come to common 
terms: that we will worship none but Allah, associate none with Him, nor 
take one another as lords instead of Allah.” But if they turn away, then say, 


1°99 


“Bear witness that we have submitted ‘to Allah alone’. 


The Truth About Abraham 

65. O People of the Book! Why do you argue about Abraham, while the 
Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until long after him? Do you not 
understand? 66. Here you are! You disputed about what you have ‘little’ 
knowledge of,'442! but why do you now argue about what you have no 
knowledge of?!444! Allah knows and you do not know. 67. Abraham was 
neither a Jew nor a Christian; he submitted in all uprightness!!42! and was 
not a polytheist. 68. Indeed, those who have the best claim to Abraham are 
his followers, this Prophet, 1&1 and the believers. And Allah is the Guardian 
of those who believe. 


Distorting the Truth 
69. Some of the People of the Book wish to mislead you ‘believers’. They 
mislead none but themselves, yet they fail to perceive it. 70. O People of the 
Book! Why do you reject the signs of Allah while you bear witness "to their 
truth’? 71. O People of the Book! Why do you mix the truth with falsehood 
and hide the truth knowingly? 


Deception Exposed 
72. A group among the People of the Book said ‘to one another’, “Believe 
in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and reject it in the 
evening, so they may abandon their faith. 73. And only believe those who 
follow your religion.” Say, “O Prophet,’ “Surely, "the only’ true guidance is 
Allah’s guidance.” “They also said,’ “Do not believe that someone will 


receive ‘revealed’ knowledge similar to yours or argue against you before 
your Lord.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Indeed, all bounty is in the Hands of Allah— 
He grants it to whoever He wills. And Allah is All-Bountiful, All- 
Knowing.” 74. He chooses whoever He wills to receive His mercy. And 
Allah is the Lord of infinite bounty. 


Honouring Trusts 

75. There are some among the People of the Book who, if entrusted with a 
stack of gold, will readily return it. Yet there are others who, if entrusted 
with a single coin, will not repay it unless you constantly demand it. This is 
because they say, “We are not accountable for ‘exploiting’ the 
Gentiles.”'44! And ‘so’ they attribute lies to Allah knowingly. 76. 
Absolutely! Those who honour their trusts and shun evil—surely Allah 
loves those who are mindful ‘of Him’. 


Breaking Allah’s Covenant 
77. Indeed, those who trade Allah’s covenant and their oaths for a fleeting 
gain will have no share in the Hereafter. Allah will neither speak to them, 
nor look at them, nor purify them on the Day of Judgment. And they will 
suffer a painful punishment. 


Distorting the Scripture 
78. There are some among them who distort the Book with their tongues to 
make you think this ‘distortion’ is from the Book—but it is not what the 
Book says. They say, “It is from Allah”’—but it is not from Allah. And ‘so’ 
they attribute lies to Allah knowingly. 


Prophets Never Claim Divinity 
79. It is not appropriate for someone who Allah has blessed with the 
Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to say to people, “Worship me instead 
of Allah.” Rather, he would say, “Be devoted to the worship of your Lord 
“alone '’”—in accordance with what these prophets read in the Scripture and 
what they taught. 80. And he would never ask you to take angels and 
prophets as lords. Would he ask you to disbelieve after you have submitted? 
Allah’s Covenant with Prophets 
81. ‘Remember’ when Allah made a covenant with the prophets, ‘saying,’ 
“Now that I have given you the Book and wisdom, if there comes to you a 
messenger] confirming what you have, you must believe in him and 


support him.” He added, “Do you affirm this covenant and accept this 
commitment?” They said, “Yes, we do.” Allah said, “Then bear witness, 
and I too am a Witness.” 82. Whoever turns back after this, they will be the 
rebellious. 


Full Submission 
83. Do they desire a way other than Allah’s—knowing that all those in the 
heavens and the earth submit to His Will, willingly or unwillingly, and to 
Him they will ‘all’ be returned? 


Prophets of Islam 
84. Say, "O Prophet,’ “We believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us 
and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his 
descendants; and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and other prophets from 
their Lord—we make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we 
“fully* submit.” 


The Only Way 
85. Whoever seeks a way other than Islam,46! it will never be accepted 
from them, and in the Hereafter they will be among the losers. 


Deviating from the Right Path 
86. How will Allah guide a people who chose to disbelieve after they had 
believed, acknowledged the Messenger to be true, and received clear 
proofs? For Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people. 87. Their reward 
is that they will be condemned by Allah, the angels, and all of humanity. 88. 
They will be in Hell forever. Their punishment will not be lightened, nor 
will they be delayed ‘from it’. 89. As for those who repent afterwards and 
mend their ways, then surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 

Dying in a State of Disbelief 
90. Indeed, those who disbelieve after having believed then increase in 
disbelief, their repentance will never be accepted.!/42! It is they who are 
astray. 91. Indeed, if each of those who disbelieve then die as disbelievers 
were to offer a ransom of enough gold to fill the whole world, it would 
never be accepted from them. It is they who will suffer a painful 
punishment, and they will have no helpers. 


Righteous Giving 


92. You will never achieve righteousness until you donate some of what you 
cherish. And whatever you give is certainly well known to Allah. 


Jacob’s Dietary Restriction 
93. All food was lawful for the children of Israel, except what Israe 
made unlawful for himself before the Torah was revealed.'!49! Say, "O 
Prophet,’ “Bring the Torah and read it, if your claims are true.” 94. Then 
whoever still fabricates lies about Allah, they will be the ‘true’ wrongdoers. 
95. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Allah has declared the truth. So follow the Way of 
Abraham, the upright—who was not a polytheist.” 


[448] 


Pilgrimage to the Sacred House in Mecca 
96. Surely the first House ‘of worship’ established for humanity is the one 
at Bakkah—a blessed sanctuary and a guide for ‘all’ people. 97. In it are 
clear signs and the standing-place of Abraham. Whoever enters it should be 
safe. Pilgrimage to this House is an obligation by Allah upon whoever is 
able among the people.'422! And whoever disbelieves, then surely Allah is 
not in need of ‘any of His" creation. 


Rejecting the Truth 
98. Say, "O Prophet," “O People of the Book! Why do you deny the 
revelations of Allah, when Allah is a Witness to what you do?” 99. Say, “O 
People of the Book! Why do you turn the believers away from the Way of 
Allah—striving to make it ‘appear’ crooked, while you are witnesses ‘to its 
truth’? And Allah is never unaware of what you do.” 


Warning Against Evil Influence 
100. O believers! If you were to yield to a group of those who were given 
the Scripture, they would turn you back from belief to disbelief. 101. How 
can you disbelieve when Allah’s revelations are recited to you and His 
Messenger is in your midst? Whoever holds firmly to Allah is surely guided 
to the Straight Path. 
Warning Against Disunity 

102. O believers! Be mindful of Allah in the way He deserves,'424! and do 
not die except in "a state of full’ submission "to Him’.!4£2! 103. And hold 
firmly to the rope of Allah] and do not be divided. Remember Allah’s 
favour upon you when you were enemies, then He united your hearts, so 
you—by His grace—became brothers. And you were at the brink of a fiery 


pit and He saved you from it. This is how Allah makes His revelations clear 
to you, so that you may be ‘rightly’ guided. 104. Let there be a group 
among you who call ‘others’ to goodness, encourage what is good, and 
forbid what is evil—it is they who will be successful. 105. And do not be 
like those who split ‘into sects’ and differed after clear proofs had come to 
them. It is they who will suffer a tremendous punishment. 


The Joyful and the Miserable 

106. On that Day some faces will be bright while others gloomy. To the 
gloomy-faced it will be said, “Did you disbelieve after having believed? So 
taste the punishment for your disbelief.” 107. As for the bright-faced, they 
will be in Allah’s mercy, where they will remain forever. 108. These are 
Allah’s revelations We recite to you "O Prophet’ in truth. And Allah desires 
no injustice to ‘His’ creation. 109. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs whatever is in 
the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And to Allah ‘all’ matters will be 
returned "for judgment’. 


Excellence of the Muslim Nation 
110. You are the best community ever raised for humanity—you encourage 
good, forbid evil, and believe in Allah. Had the People of the Book 
believed, it would have been better for them. Some of them are faithful, but 
most are rebellious. 


Reward of the Rebellious 

111. They can never inflict harm on you, except a little annoyance.!44! But 
if they meet you in battle, they will flee and they will have no helpers. 112. 
They will be stricken with disgrace wherever they go, unless they are 
protected by a covenant with Allah or a treaty with the people. They have 
invited the displeasure of Allah and have been branded with misery for 
rejecting Allah’s revelations and murdering "His’ prophets unjustly. This is 
"a fair reward’ for their disobedience and violations. 


Upright People of the Book 
113. Yet they are not all alike: there are some among the People of the Book 
who are upright, who recite Allah’s revelations throughout the night, 
prostrating “in prayer’. 114. They believe in Allah and the Last Day, 
encourage good and forbid evil, and race with one another in doing good. 
They are ‘truly’ among the righteous. 115. They will never be denied the 


reward for any good they have done. And Allah has "perfect’ knowledge of 
those mindful "of Him’. 


Warning Against Hypocrites 
116. Indeed, neither the wealth nor children of the disbelievers will be of 
any benefit to them against Allah. It is they who will be the residents of the 
Fire. They will be there forever. 117. The good they do in this worldly life 
is like the harvest of an evil people struck by a bitter wind, destroying it 
‘completely’. Allah never wronged them, but they wronged themselves. 


Association with Hypocrites 

118. O believers! Do not associate closely with others who would not miss 
a chance to harm you. Their only desire is to see you suffer. Their prejudice 
has become evident from what they say—and what their hearts hide is far 
worse. We have made Our revelations clear to you, if only you understood. 
119. Here you are! You love them but they do not love you, and you believe 
in all Scriptures. When they meet you they say, “We believe.” But when 
alone, they bite their fingertips in rage. Say, "O Prophet,’ “May you’ die of 
your rage!” Surely Allah knows best what is “hidden” in the heart. 120. 
When you ‘believers’ are touched with good, they grieve; but when you are 
afflicted with evil, they rejoice. ‘Yet,’ if you are patient and mindful ‘of 
Allah’, their schemes will not harm you in the least. Surely Allah is Fully 
Aware of what they do. 


The Battle of U hud =! 
121. ‘Remember, O Prophet,’ when you left your home in the early morning 
to position the believers in the battlefield. And Allah is All-Hearing, All- 
Knowing. 122. "Remember’ when two groups among you ‘believers’ were 
about to cower, then Allah reassured them. So in Allah let the believers put 
their trust. 


The Battle of Badr 
123. Indeed, Allah made you victorious at Badr when you were ‘vastly’ 
outnumbered. So be mindful of Allah, perhaps you will be grateful. 124. 
“Remember, O Prophet,’ when you said to the believers, “Is it not enough 
that your Lord will send down a reinforcement of three thousand angels for 
your aid?” 125. Most certainly, if you ‘believers’ are firm and mindful ‘of 
Allah’ and the enemy launches a sudden attack on you, Allah will reinforce 


you with five thousand angels designated ‘for battle’. 126. Allah ordained 
this ‘reinforcement’ only as good news for you and reassurance for your 
hearts. And victory comes only from Allah—the Almighty, All-Wise— 
127. to destroy a group of the disbelievers and humble the rest, causing 
them to withdraw in disappointment. 


Allah Is the Judge 
128. You "O Prophet’ have no say in the matter.!425! It is up to Allah to turn 
to them in mercy or punish them, for indeed they are wrongdoers. 129. To 
Allah ‘alone’ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the 
earth. He forgives whoever He wills, and punishes whoever He wills. And 
Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Warning Against Interest 
130. O believers! Do not consume interest, multiplying it many times over. 
And be mindful of Allah, so you may prosper. 131. Guard yourselves 
against the Fire prepared for the disbelievers. 132. Obey Allah and the 
Messenger, so you may be shown mercy. 


Reward of the Righteous 

133. And hasten towards forgiveness from your Lord and a Paradise as vast 
as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those mindful ‘of Allah’. 134. 
“They are’ those who donate in prosperity and adversity, control their anger, 
and pardon others. And Allah loves the good-doers. 135. ‘They are’ those 
who, upon committing an evil deed or wronging themselves, remember 
Allah and seek forgiveness and do not knowingly persist in sin—and who 
forgives sins except Allah? 136. Their reward is forgiveness from their Lord 
and Gardens under which rivers flow, staying there forever. How excellent 
is the reward for those who work "righteousness"! 


Battle Between Good and Evil 
137. Similar situations came to pass before you, so travel throughout the 
land and see the fate of the deniers. 138. This% is an insight to humanity 
—a guide and a lesson to the God-fearing. 


Reassuring the Believers 
139. Do not falter or grieve, for you will have the upper hand, if you are 
‘true’ believers. 140. If you have suffered injuries “at Uhud’, they suffered 
similarly ‘at Badr’. We alternate these days ‘of victory and defeat’ among 


people so that Allah may reveal the ‘true’ believers, choose martyrs from 
among you—and Allah does not like the wrongdoers— 141. and distinguish 
the ‘true’ believers and destroy the disbelievers. 


Believers Tested 
142. Do you think you will enter Paradise without Allah proving which of 
you ‘truly’ struggled ‘for His cause’ and patiently endured? 143. You 
certainly wished ‘for the opportunity’ for martyrdom before encountering it, 
now you have seen it with your own eyes. 


Believers Disheartened!4581. 

144. Muhammad is no more than a messenger; other messengers have gone 
before him. If he were to die or to be killed, would you regress into 
disbelief? Those who do so will not harm Allah whatsoever. And Allah will 
reward those who are grateful. 145. No soul can ever die without Allah’s 
Will at the destined time. Those who desire worldly gain, We will let them 
have it, and those who desire heavenly reward, We will grant it to them. 
And We will reward those who are grateful. 


Reward of the Steadfast 

146. ‘Imagine’ how many devotees fought along with their prophets and 
never faltered despite whatever ‘losses’ they suffered in the cause of Allah, 
nor did they weaken or give in! Allah loves those who persevere. 147. And 
all they said was, “Our Lord! Forgive our sins and excesses, make our steps 
firm, and grant us victory over the disbelieving people.” 148. So Allah gave 
them the reward of this world and the excellent reward of the Hereafter. For 
Allah loves the good-doers. 


Yielding to the Disbelievers 
149. O believers! If you yield to the disbelievers, they will drag you back to 
disbelief—and you will become losers. 150. But no! Allah is your 
Guardian, and He is the best Helper. 151. We will cast horror into the hearts 
of the disbelievers for associating “false gods’ with Allah—a practice He 
has never authorized. The Fire will be their home—what an evil place for 
the wrongdoers to stay! 


Victory Denied at Uhud 
152. Indeed, Allah fulfilled His promise to you when you ‘initially’ swept 
them away by His Will, then your courage weakened and you disputed 


about the command and disobeyed,!4°2! after Allah had brought victory 
within your reach. Some of you were after worldly gain while others 
desired a heavenly reward. He denied you victory over them as a test, yet 
He has pardoned you. And Allah is Gracious to the believers. 


The Army Retreats 

153. ‘Remember’ when you were running far away ‘in panic'—not looking 
at anyone—while the Messenger was calling to you from behind! So Allah 
rewarded your disobedience with distress upon distress. Now, do not grieve 
over the victory you were denied or the injury you suffered. And Allah is 
All-Aware of what you do. 154. Then after distress, He sent down serenity 
in the form of drowsiness overcoming some of you, while others were 
disturbed by evil thoughts about Allah—the thoughts of ‘pre-Islamic’ 
ignorance. They ask, “Do we have a say in the matter?” Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“All matters are destined by Allah.” They conceal in their hearts what they 
do not reveal to you. They say ‘to themselves’, “If we had any say in the 
matter, none of us would have come to die here.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Even if 
you were to remain in your homes, those among you who were destined to 
be killed would have met the same fate.” Through this, Allah tests what is 
within you and purifies what is in your hearts. And Allah knows best what 
is ‘hidden’ in the heart. 


The Deserters 
155. Indeed, those ‘believers’ who fled on the day when the two armies met 
were made to slip by Satan because of their misdeeds. But Allah has 
pardoned them. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing. 


It Is All Destined 

156. O believers! Do not be like the unfaithful!4®2! who say about their 
brothers who travel throughout the land or engage in battle, “If they had 
stayed with us, they would not have died or been killed.” Allah makes such 
thinking a cause of agony in their hearts. It is Allah who gives life and 
causes death. And Allah is All-Seeing of what you do. 157. Should you be 
martyred or die in the cause of Allah, then His forgiveness and mercy are 
far better than whatever ‘wealth’ those "who stay behind’ accumulate. 158. 
Whether you die or are martyred—all of you will be gathered before Allah. 


Prophet’s Kindness to the Believers 


159. It is out of Allah’s mercy that you "O Prophet’ have been lenient with 
them. Had you been cruel or hard-hearted, they would have certainly 
abandoned you. So pardon them, ask Allah’s forgiveness for them, and 
consult with them in ‘conducting’ matters. Once you make a decision, put 
your trust in Allah. Surely Allah loves those who trust in Him. 


Victory Is from Allah 
160. If Allah helps you, none can defeat you. But if He denies you help, 
then who else can help you? So in Allah let the believers put their trust. 


Spoils of War 
161. It is not appropriate for a prophet to illegally withhold spoils of war. 
And whoever does so, it will be held against them on the Day of Judgment. 
Then every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and none will be 
wronged. 


Good-Doers and Wrongdoers 
162. Are those who seek Allah’s pleasure like those who deserve Allah’s 
wrath? Hell is their home. What an evil destination! 163. They ‘each’ have 
varying degrees in the sight of Allah. And Allah is All-Seeing of what they 
do. 


The Prophet as a Blessing 
164. Indeed, Allah has done the believers a ‘great’ favour by raising a 
messenger from among them—reciting to them His revelations, purifying 
them, and teaching them the Book and wisdom. For indeed they had 
previously been clearly astray. 


Lessons from the Battle of Uhud 
165. Why is it when you suffered casualties "at Uhud’—although you had 
made your enemy suffer twice as much ‘at Badr’—you protested, “How 
could this be?”? Say, "O Prophet,’ “It is because of your disobedience.” 
Surely Allah is Most Capable of everything. 166. So what you suffered on 
the day the two armies met was by Allah’s Will, so that He might 
distinguish the ‘true’ believers 167. and expose the hypocrites. When it was 
said to them, “Come fight in the cause of Allah or ‘at least’ defend 
yourselves,” they replied, “If we had known there was fighting, we would 
have definitely gone with you.” They were closer to disbelief than to belief 
on that day—for saying with their mouths what was not in their hearts. 


Allah is All-Knowing of what they hide. 168. Those who sat at home, 
saying about their brothers, “Had they listened to us, they would not have 
been killed.” Say, "O Prophet,” “Try not to die!!! if what you say is true!” 


Martyrs Honoured 
169. Never think of those martyred in the cause of Allah as dead. In fact, 
they are alive with their Lord, well provided for— 170. rejoicing in Allah’s 
bounties and being delighted for those yet to join them. There will be no 
fear for them, nor will they grieve. 171. They are joyful for receiving 
Allah’s grace and bounty, and that Allah does not deny the reward of the 
believers. 


Reward of the Steadfast 

172. "As for’ those who responded to the call of Allah and His Messenger 
after their injury,!©2! those of them who did good and were mindful ‘of 
Allah’ will have a great reward. 173. Those who were warned, “Your 
enemies have mobilized their forces against you, so fear them,” the warning 
only made them grow stronger in faith and they replied, “Allah ‘alone’ is 
sufficient ‘as an aid’ for us and ‘He’ is the best Protector.” 174. So they 
returned with Allah’s favours and grace, suffering no harm. For they sought 
to please Allah. And surely Allah is ‘the’ Lord of infinite bounty. 175. That 
“warning was only ‘from’ Satan, trying to prompt you to fear his followers. 
[163] So do not fear them; fear Me if you are ‘true’ believers. 


Disbelievers’ Delusion 
176. "O Prophet!" Do not grieve for those who race to disbelieve—surely 
they will not harm Allah in the least. It is Allah’s Will to disallow them a 
share in the Hereafter, and they will suffer a tremendous punishment. 177. 
Those who trade belief for disbelief will never harm Allah in the least, and 
they will suffer a painful punishment. 178. Those who disbelieve should not 
think that living longer is good for them. They are only given more time to 
increase in sin, and they will suffer a humiliating punishment. 
Sincerity Test 

179. Allah would not leave the believers in the condition you were in, until 
He distinguished the good from the evil ‘among you’. Nor would Allah 
‘directly’ reveal to you the unseen, |164! but He chooses whoever He wills as 


a messenger. So believe in Allah and His messengers. And if you are 
faithful and mindful "of Allah’, you will receive a great reward. 


Reward of the Stingy 
180. And do not let those who ‘greedily’ withhold Allah’s bounties think it 
is good for them—in fact, it is bad for them! They will be leashed ‘by their 
necks’ on the Day of Judgment with whatever ‘wealth’ they used to 
withhold. And Allah is the ‘sole’ inheritor of the heavens and the earth. And 
Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 


Blasphemy Exposed 
181. Indeed, Allah has heard those "among the Jews’ who said, “Allah is 
poor; we are rich!” We have certainly recorded their slurs and their killing 
of prophets unjustly. Then We will say, “Taste the torment of burning! 182. 
This is ‘the reward’ for what your hands have done. And Allah is never 
unjust to "His" creation.” 


Rejecting Allah’s Messengers 

183. Those ‘are the same people’ who say, “Allah has commanded us not to 
believe in any messenger unless he brings us an offering to be consumed by 
fire "from the sky’.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Other prophets did in fact come to 
you!!65! before me with clear proofs and "even" what you demanded—why 
then did you kill them, if what you say is true?” 184. If you are rejected by 
them, so too were messengers before you who came with clear proofs, 
divine Books, and enlightening Scriptures. !165! 


Death Is Inevitable 
185. Every soul will taste death. And you will only receive your full reward 
on the Day of Judgment. Whoever is spared from the Fire and is admitted 
into Paradise will ‘indeed’ triumph, whereas the life of this world is no 
more than the delusion of enjoyment. 
Patience Tested 

186. You ‘believers’ will surely be tested in your wealth and yourselves, | 197! 
and you will certainly hear many hurtful words from those who were given 
the Scripture before you and ‘from’ the polytheists. But if you are patient 
and mindful ‘of Allah’—surely this is a resolve to aspire to. 


Breaking Allah’s Covenant 


187. "Remember, O Prophet,’ when Allah took the covenant of those who 
were given the Scripture to make it known to people and not hide it, yet 
they cast it behind their backs and traded it for a fleeting gain. What a 
miserable profit! 188. Do not let those who rejoice in their misdeeds and 
love to take credit for what they have not done think they will escape 
torment. They will suffer a painful punishment. 


Allah’s Signs 
189. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. 
And Allah is Most Capable of everything. 190. Indeed, in the creation of 
the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the day and night there are 
signs for people of reason. 


A Prayer of the Righteous 

191. ‘They are’ those who remember Allah while standing, sitting, and 
lying on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth 
"and pray’, “Our Lord! You have not created ‘all of’ this without purpose. 
Glory be to You! Protect us from the torment of the Fire. 192. Our Lord! 
Indeed, those You commit to the Fire will be "completely’ disgraced! And 
the wrongdoers will have no helpers. 193. Our Lord! We have heard the 
caller!4£8] to “true” belief, "proclaiming, ‘Believe in your Lord ‘alone’,’ so 
we believed. Our Lord! Forgive our sins, absolve us of our misdeeds, and 
allow us ‘each’ to die as one of the virtuous. 194. Our Lord! Grant us what 
You have promised us through Your messengers and do not put us to shame 
on Judgment Day—for certainly You never fail in Your promise.” 


Prayers Answered 
195. So their Lord responded to them: “I will never deny any of you—male 
or female—the reward of your deeds. Both are equal in reward. Those who 
migrated or were expelled from their homes, and were persecuted for My 
sake and fought and ‘some’ were martyred—I will certainly forgive their 
sins and admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, as a reward from 
Allah. And with Allah is the finest reward!” 


Disbelievers’ Brief Enjoyment 
196. Do not be deceived by the prosperity of the disbelievers throughout the 
land. 197. It is only a brief enjoyment. Then Hell will be their home—what 
an evil place to rest! 


Believers’ Everlasting Delight 
198. But those who are mindful of their Lord will be in Gardens under 
which rivers flow, to stay there forever—as an accommodation from Allah. 
And what is with Allah is best for the virtuous. 


Believers Among People of the Book 
199. Indeed, there are some among the People of the Book who truly 
believe in Allah and what has been revealed to you ‘believers’ and what was 
revealed to them. They humble themselves before Allah—never trading 
Allah’s revelations for a fleeting gain. Their reward is with their Lord. 
Surely Allah is swift in reckoning. 


Advice for Success 
200. O believers! Patiently endure, persevere, stand on guard, | 169! and be 


mindful of Allah, so you may be successful. 
kkk 


4. Women 
(An-Nisâ') 


This sûrah focuses on the rights of women (hence the sûrah’s name), the law 
of inheritance, care for orphans, lawful and unlawful women to marry, and 
standing for justice (see the remarkable example of justice to a Jew in 
verses 105-112). As the sûrah progresses, the focus shifts to the etiquette of 
striving in the cause of Allah and the relationship between Muslims and the 
People of the Book, culminating in q gebuttal to the claims about the 
crucifixion and divinity of Jesus ( - (z712). Like the previous and the next 
sûrahs, this sûrah also deals with /fhéssue of hypocrisy—a common theme 
in many other Medinian sûrahs. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Commitment to Allah and Kinship Ties 
1. O humanity! Be mindful of your Lord Who created you from a single 
soul, and from it He created its mate, Z?! and through both He spread 
countless men and women. And be mindful of Allah—in Whose Name you 
appeal to one another—and ‘honour’ family ties. Surely Allah is ever 
Watchful over you. 


Orphans Given back Their Wealth 
2. Give orphans their wealth "when they reach maturity’, and do not 
exchange your worthless possessions for their valuables, nor cheat them by 
mixing their wealth with your own. For this would indeed be a great sin. 


Bridal Gifts 

3. If you fear you might fail to give orphan women their ‘due’ rights "if you 
were to marry them’, then marry other women of your choice—two, three, 
or four. But if you are afraid you will fail to maintain justice, then "content 
yourselves with" one!4Z4! or those "bondwomen’ in your possession. 72 
This way you are less likely to commit injustice. 4. Give women ‘you wed’ 
their due dowries graciously. But if they waive some of it willingly, then 
you may enjoy it freely with a clear conscience. 


Managing Wealth Responsibly 


5. Do not entrust the incapable ‘among your dependants’ with your wealth 
which Allah has made a means of support for you—but feed and clothe 
them from it, and speak to them kindly. 


Orphans’ Wealth 

6. Test ‘the competence of’ the orphans until they reach a marriageable age. 
Then if you feel they are capable of sound judgment, return their wealth to 
them. And do not consume it wastefully and hastily before they grow up ‘to 
demand it’. If the guardian is well-off, they should not take compensation; 
but if the guardian is poor, let them take a reasonable provision. When you 
give orphans back their property, call in witnesses. And sufficient is Allah 
as a ‘vigilant’ Reckoner. 


Inheritance Law!!! 1) Males and Females 
7. For men there is a share in what their parents and close relatives leave, 
and for women there is a share in what their parents and close relatives 
leave—whether it is little or much. "These are’ obligatory shares. 
Acts of Kindness 

8. If "non-inheriting” relatives, orphans,'124! or the needy are present at the 
time of distribution, offer them a ‘small’ provision from it and speak to 
them kindly. 


Caring for Orphans 
9. Let the guardians be as concerned ‘for the orphans’ as they would if they 
were to ‘die and’ leave ‘their own’ helpless children behind. So let them be 
mindful of Allah and speak equitably. 10. Indeed, those who unjustly 
consume orphans’ wealth ‘in fact’ consume nothing but fire into their 
bellies. And they will be burned in a blazing Hell! 
Inheritance Law 2) Offspring and Parents 

11. Allah commands you regarding your children: the share of the male will 
be twice that of the female.'!25! If you leave only two "or more” females, 
their share is two-thirds of the estate. But if there is only one female, her 
share will be one-half. Each parent is entitled to one-sixth if you leave 
offspring.'126! But if you are childless and your parents are the only heirs, 
then your mother will receive one-third.!Z! But if you leave siblings, then 
your mother will receive one-sixth!!2®!—after the fulfilment of bequests and 
debts.!!29! "Be fair to” your parents and children, as you do not “fully” know 


who is more beneficial to you.!!82! "This is’ an obligation from Allah. 
Surely Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Inheritance Law 3) Spouses, 4) Maternal Siblings 

12. You will inherit half of what your wives leave if they are childless. But 
if they have children, then ‘your share is* one-fourth of the estate—after the 
fulfilment of bequests and debts. And your wives will inherit one-fourth of 
what you leave if you are childless. But if you have children, then your 
wives will receive one-eighth of your estate—after the fulfilment of 
bequests and debts. And if a man or a woman leaves neither parents nor 
children but only a brother or a sister "from their mother’s side’, they will 
each inherit one-sixth, but if they are more than one, they ‘all’ will share 
one-third of the estate!t8t!—after the fulfilment of bequests and debts 
without harm "to the heirs’.!482! "This is? a commandment from Allah. And 
Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing. 


Compliance with Inheritance Laws 
13. These ‘entitlements’ are the limits set by Allah. Whoever obeys Allah 
and His Messenger will be admitted into Gardens under which rivers flow, 
to stay there forever. That is the ultimate triumph! 14. But whoever 
disobeys Allah and His Messenger and exceeds their limits will be cast into 
Hell, to stay there forever. And they will suffer a humiliating punishment. 


Illegal Sexual Relationships!483!. 
15. "As for’ those of your women who commit illegal intercourse—call four 
witnesses from among yourselves. If they testify, confine the offenders to 
their homes until they die or Allah ordains a ‘different’ way for them. 16. 
And the two among you who commit this sin—discipline them. If they 
repent and mend their ways, relieve them. Surely Allah is ever Accepting of 
Repentance, Most Merciful. 


Accepted and Rejected Repentance 
17. Allah only accepts the repentance of those who commit evil ignorantly 
"or recklessly’ then repent soon after!484!—Allah will pardon them. And 
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 18. However, repentance is not accepted 
from those who knowingly persist in sin until they start dying, and then cry, 
“Now I repent!” nor those who die as disbelievers. For them We have 
prepared a painful punishment. 


Abusing Women Financially 

19. O believers! It is not permissible for you to inherit women against their 
will!485! or mistreat them to make them retum some of the dowry "as a 
ransom for divorce’-—unless they are found guilty of adultery.'48°! Treat 
them fairly. If you happen to dislike them, you may hate something which 
Allah turns into a great blessing. 20. If you desire to replace a wife with 
another and you have given the former "even’ a stack of gold ‘as a dowry’, 
do not take any of it back. Would you ‘still’ take it unjustly and very 
sinfully? 21. And how could you take it back after having enjoyed each 
other intimately and she has taken from you a firm commitment?!482! 


Lawful and Unlawful Women to Marry!488! 


22. Do not marry former wives of your fathers—except what was done 
previously. It was indeed a shameful, despicable, and evil practice. 23. 
Also’ forbidden to you for marriage are your mothers, your daughters, your 
sisters, your paternal and maternal aunts, your brother’s daughters, your 
sister’s daughters, your foster-mothers, your foster-sisters, your mothers-in- 
law, your stepdaughters under your guardianship if you have consummated 
marriage with their mothers—but if you have not, then you can marry them 
—nor the wives of your own sons, nor two sisters together at the same time 
—except what was done previously. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 24. Also ‘forbidden are’ married women—except ‘female’ 
captives in your possession.!89! This is Allah’s commandment to you. "But" 
lawful to you are all beyond these—as long as you seek them with your 
wealth in a legal marriage, not in fornication. Give those you have 
consummated marriage with their due dowries. It is permissible to be 
mutually gracious regarding the set dowry. Surely Allah is All-Knowing, 
All-Wise. 


Marrying Bondwomen 
25. But if any of you cannot afford to marry a free believing woman, then 
‘let him marry’ a believing bondwoman possessed by one of you. Allah 
knows best ‘the state of’ your faith "and theirs’. You are from one another. 
[190] So marry them with the permission of their owners,!!%! giving them 
their dowry in fairness, if they are chaste, neither promiscuous nor having 
secret affairs. If they commit indecency after marriage, they receive half the 


punishment of free women.!/22! This is for those of you who fear falling 
into sin. But if you are patient, it is better for you. And Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Allah’s Grace 
26. It is Allah’s Will to make things clear to you, guide you to the ‘noble’ 
ways of those before you, and turn to you in mercy. For Allah is All- 
Knowing, All-Wise. 27. And it is Allah’s Will to turn to you in grace, but 
those who follow their desires wish to see you deviate entirely ‘from 
Allah’s Way’. 28. And it is Allah’s Will to lighten your burdens, for 
humankind was created weak. 


Prohibition of Abuse 
29. O believers! Do not devour one another’s wealth illegally, but rather 
trade by mutual consent. And do not kill ‘each other or’ yourselves. Surely 
Allah is ever Merciful to you. 30. And whoever does this sinfully and 
unjustly, We will burn them in the Fire. That is easy for Allah. 

Avoiding Major Sins 
31. If you avoid the major sins forbidden to you, We will absolve you of 
your ‘lesser’ misdeeds and admit you into a place of honour.!H23] 


Inheritance Law 5) Contentment 
32. And do not crave what Allah has given some of you over others. Men 
will be rewarded according to their deeds and women ‘equally’ according to 
theirs. Rather, ask Allah for His bounties. Surely Allah has ‘perfect’ 
knowledge of all things. 33. And We have appointed heirs to what has been 
left by parents and next of kin. As for those you have made a pledge to, 
give them their share.'4! Surely Allah is a Witness over all things. 


Husbands as Providers and Protectors 

34. Men are the caretakers of women, as men have been provisioned by 
Allah over women and tasked with supporting them financially. And 
righteous women are devoutly obedient and, when alone, protective of what 
Allah has entrusted them with.!25! And if you sense ill-conduct from your 
women, advise them ‘first’, “if they persist,’ do not share their beds, "but if 
they still persist,” then discipline them "gently’.!4%5! But if they change their 
ways, do not be unjust to them. Surely Allah is Most High, All-Great. 


Reconciling Married Couples 
35. If you anticipate a split between them, appoint a mediator from his 
family and another from hers. If they desire reconciliation, Allah will 
restore harmony between them. Surely Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware. 


The Kind, the Stingy, and the Insincere 

36. Worship Allah ‘alone’ and associate none with Him. And be kind to 
parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, near and distant neighbours, close 
friends, ‘needy’ travellers, and those "bondspeople’ in your possession. 
Surely Allah does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful— 37. those who 
are stingy, promote stinginess among people, and withhold Allah’s 
bounties. We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment. 
38. Likewise for those who spend their wealth to show off and do not 
believe in Allah or the Last Day. And whoever takes Satan as an associate 
—what an evil associate they have! 


Divine Justice 
39. What harm could have come to them if they had believed in Allah and 
the Last Day and donated from what Allah has provided for them? And 
Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of them. 40. Indeed, Allah never wrongs 
"anyone’—even by an atom’s weight.!192! And if it is a good deed, He will 
multiply it many times over and will give a great reward out of His grace. 


Witnesses on Judgment Day 
41. So how will it be when We bring a witness from every faith-community 
and bring you "O Prophet" as a witness against yours? 42. On that Day, 
those who denied ‘Allah’ and disobeyed the Messenger will wish they were 


reduced to dust. And they will never be able to hide anything from Allah. 
[198] 


Purification Before Prayers 
43. O believers! Do not approach prayer while intoxicated!!2! until you are 
aware of what you say, nor in a state of “full” impurity'222! unless you 
merely pass through ‘the mosque’—until you have bathed. But if you are ill, 
on a journey, or have relieved yourselves, or been intimate with your wives 
and cannot find water, then purify yourselves with clean earth, wiping your 


faces and hands.'224! And Allah is Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving. 


Warning Against Deviance 


44. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen those who were given a portion of the 
Scriptures yet trade it for misguidance and wish to see you deviate from the 
"Right’ Path? 45. Allah knows best who your enemies are! And Allah is 
sufficient as a Guardian, and He is sufficient as a Helper. 


Humility with the Prophet!222/ 
46. Some Jews take words out of context and say, “We listen and we 
disobey,” “Hear! May you never hear,” and “Rda’ina!” [Herd us! ]—playing 
with words and discrediting the faith. Had they said ‘courteously’, “We hear 
and obey,” “Listen to us,” and “UnZurna,” [Tend to us!] it would have been 
better for them and more proper. Allah has condemned them for their 
disbelief, so they do not believe except for a few. 


Reward for Rejecting the Truth 
47. O you who were given the Book! Believe in what We have revealed— 
confirming your own Scriptures—before We wipe out ‘your’ faces, turning 
them backwards, or We condemn the defiant as We did to the Sabbath- 
breakers.!293! And Allah’s command is always executed! 


The Only Unforgivable Sin 
48. Indeed, Allah does not forgive associating others with Him ‘in worship’, 
[204] but forgives anything else of whoever He wills. And whoever 
associates others with Allah has indeed committed a grave sin. 


Self-Righteousness 
49. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen those who ‘falsely’ elevate themselves? 
It is Allah who elevates whoever He wills. And none will be wronged "even 
by the width of" the thread of a date stone. 50. See how they fabricate lies 
against Allah—this alone is a blatant sin. 


False Reassurance 
51. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen those who were given a portion of the 
Scriptures yet believe in idols and false gods and reassure the 
disbelievers!22! that they are better guided than the believers? 52. It is they 
who have been condemned by Allah. And whoever is condemned by Allah 
will have no helper. 


Envy Breeds Disbelief 


53. Do they have control over shares of the kingdom? If so, they would not 
have given anyone so much as the speck on a date stone. 54. Or do they 
envy the people for Allah’s bounties? Indeed, We have given the 
descendants of Abraham the Book and wisdom, along with great authority. 
55. Yet some believed in him while others turned away from him.'2°5! Hell 
is sufficient as a torment! 


Punishment of the Disbelievers 
56. Surely those who reject Our signs, We will cast them into the Fire. 
Whenever their skin is burnt completely, We will replace it so they will 
‘constantly’ taste the punishment. Indeed, Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 


Reward of the Believers 
57. As for those who believe and do good, We will admit them into Gardens 
under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. There they will 
have pure spouses,|222! and We will place them under a vast shade. 


Maintaining Justice 
58. Indeed, Allah commands you to return trusts to their rightful owners; 
[208] and when you judge between people, judge with fairness. What a noble 
commandment from Allah to you! Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 


Divine Judgment 
59. O believers! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority 
among you. Should you disagree on anything, then refer it to Allah and His 
Messenger, if you ‘truly’ believe in Allah and the Last Day. This is the best 
and fairest resolution. 


Hypocrites Rejecting Divine Judgment 

60. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen those who claim they believe in what 
has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They seek the 
judgment of false judges, which they were commanded to reject. And Satan 
“only’ desires to lead them farther away. 61. When it is said to them, “Come 
to Allah’s revelations and to the Messenger,” you see the hypocrites turn 
away from you stubbornly. 62. How ‘horrible’ will it be if a disaster strikes 
them because of what their hands have done, then they come to you 
swearing by Allah, “We intended nothing but goodwill and reconciliation.” 
63. "Only’ Allah knows what is in their hearts. So turn away from them, 
caution them, and give them advice that will shake their very souls. 


Obeying the Messenger 
64. We only sent messengers to be obeyed by Allah’s Will. If only those 
"hypocrites came to you "O Prophet’—after wronging themselves—seeking 
Allah’s forgiveness and the Messenger prayed for their forgiveness, they 
would have certainly found Allah ever Accepting of Repentance, Most 
Merciful. 


Unconditional Obedience 

65. But no! By your Lord, they will never be ‘true’ believers until they 
accept you "O Prophet’ as the judge in their disputes, and find no resistance 
within themselves against your decision and submit wholeheartedly. 66. If 
We had commanded them to sacrifice themselves or abandon their homes, 
none would have obeyed except for a few. Had they done what they were 
advised to do, 222! it would have certainly been far better for them and more 
reassuring, 67. and We would have granted them a great reward by Our 
grace 68. and guided them to the Straight Path. 


Reward for Obedience 
69. And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger will be in the company of 
those blessed by Allah: the prophets, the people of truth, the martyrs, and 
the righteous—what honourable company! 70. This is Allah’s favour, and 
Allah fully knows ‘who deserves it’. 


Advice to the Army 
71. O believers! Take your precautions and go forth either in groups or 
together. 72. There will be some among you who will lag behind so that if 
you face a disaster, they will say, “Allah has blessed us for not being there 
among them.” 73. But if you return with Allah’s bounties, they will say—as 
if there had been no bond between you—“We wish we had been there with 
them to share the great gain!” 
Fighting Against Oppression 

74. Let those who would sacrifice this life for the Hereafter fight in the 
cause of Allah. And whoever fights in Allah’s cause—whether they achieve 
martyrdom or victory—We will honour them with a great reward. 75. And 
what is it with you? You do not fight in the cause of Allah and for 
oppressed men, women, and children who cry out, “Our Lord! Deliver us 


from this land of oppressors! Appoint for us a saviour; appoint for us a 
helper—all by Your grace.” 


Fighting Satan’s Allies 
76. Believers fight for the cause of Allah, whereas disbelievers fight for the 
cause of the Devil. So fight against Satan’s ‘evil’ forces. Indeed, Satan’s 
schemes are ever weak. 


Those Who Cower 
77. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen those who had been told, “Do not fight! 
Rather, establish prayer and pay alms-tax.”? Then once the order came to 
fight, a group of them feared those ‘hostile’ people as Allah should be 
feared—or even more. They said, “Our Lord! Why have You ordered us to 
fight? If only You had delayed ‘the order for’ us for a little while!” Say, “O 
Prophet,’ “The enjoyment of this world is so little, whereas the Hereafter is 
far better for those mindful ‘of Allah’. And none of you will be wronged 
"even by the width of" the thread of a date stone. 


Divine Destiny 

78. Wherever you may be, death will overcome you—even if you were in 
fortified towers.” When something good befalls them, they say, “This is 
from Allah,” but when something evil befalls them, they say, “This is from 
you.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Both have been destined by Allah.” So what is the 
matter with these people? They can hardly comprehend anything! 79. 
Whatever good befalls you is from Allah and whatever evil befalls you is 
from yourself.'“12! We have sent you "O Prophet" as a messenger to “all” 
people. And Allah is sufficient as a Witness. 


Obeying the Messenger 
80. Whoever obeys the Messenger has truly obeyed Allah. But whoever 
turns away, then ‘know that’ We have not sent you "O Prophet’ as a keeper 
over them. 81. And they say, “We obey,” but when they leave you, a group 
of them would spend the night contradicting what they said. Allah records 
all their schemes. So turn away from them, and put your trust in Allah. And 
Allah is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs. 


Reflecting on the Quran 
82. Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Had it been from anyone other 
than Allah, they would have certainly found in it many inconsistencies. 


Spreading Rumours 
83. And when they hear news of security or fear, they publicize it. Had 
they referred it to the Messenger or their authorities, those with sound 
judgment among them would have validated it. Had it not been for Allah’s 
grace and mercy, you would have followed Satan—except for a few. 


Show of Strength 
84. So fight in the cause of Allah "O Prophet’. You are accountable for none 
but yourself. And motivate the believers ‘to fight’, so perhaps Allah will 
curb the disbelievers’ might. And Allah is far superior in might and in 
punishment. 


Good and Evil Intercession 
85. Whoever intercedes for a good cause will have a share in the reward, 
and whoever intercedes for an evil cause will have a share in the burden. 
And Allah is Watchful over all things. 


Responding to Greetings 
86. And when you are greeted, respond with a better greeting or at least 
similarly. Surely Allah is a ‘vigilant’ Reckoner of all things. 


Assembly for Judgment Day 
87. Allah, there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. He will certainly 
gather ‘all of’ you together on the Day of Judgment—about which there is 
no doubt. And whose word is more truthful than Allah’s? 


Stance on Hypocrites 
88. Why are you ‘believers’ divided into two groups regarding the 
hypocrites while Allah allowed them to regress ‘to disbelief’ because of 
their misdeeds? Do you wish to guide those left by Allah to stray? And 
whoever Allah leaves to stray, you will never find for them a way. 89. They 
wish you would disbelieve as they have disbelieved, so you may all be 
alike. So do not take them as allies unless they emigrate in the cause of 
Allah. But if they turn away, then seize them and kill them wherever you 
find them, and do not take any of them as allies or helpers,'2/2! 90. except 
those who are allies of a people you are bound with in a treaty or those 
wholeheartedly opposed to fighting either you or their own people. If Allah 
had willed, He would have empowered them to fight you. So if they refrain 
from fighting you and offer you peace, then Allah does not permit you to 


harm them. 91. You will find others who wish to be safe from you and their 
own people. Yet they cannot resist the temptation ‘of disbelief or hostility’. 
If they do not keep away, offer you peace, or refrain from attacking you, 
then seize them and kill them wherever you find them. We have given you 
full permission over such people. 


Killing a Believer Unintentionally 

92. It is not lawful for a believer to kill another except by mistake. And 
whoever kills a believer unintentionally must free a believing slave and pay 
blood-money to the victim’s family—aunless they waive it charitably. But if 
the victim is a believer from a hostile people, then a believing slave must be 
freed. And if the victim is from a people bound with you in a treaty, then 
blood-money must be paid to the family along with freeing a believing 
slave. Those who are unable, let them fast two consecutive months—as a 
means of repentance to Allah. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Killing a Believer Intentionally 
93. And whoever kills a believer intentionally, their reward will be Hell— 
where they will stay indefinitely.'242! Allah will be displeased with them, 
condemn them, and will prepare for them a tremendous punishment. 


Random Fighting 
94. O believers! When you struggle in the cause of Allah, be sure of who 
you fight. And do not say to those who offer you ‘greetings of" peace, “You 
are no believer!”—seeking a fleeting worldly gain.!244! Instead, Allah has 
infinite bounties ‘in store’. You were initially like them then Allah blessed 
you ‘with Islam’. So be sure! Indeed, Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 


Struggling in Allah’s Cause 

95. Those who stay at home—except those with valid excuses!2!5!—are not 
equal to those who strive in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their 
lives. Allah has elevated in rank those who strive with their wealth and their 
lives above those who stay behind ‘with valid excuses’. Allah has promised 
each a fine reward, but those who strive will receive a far better reward than 
others— 96. far superior ranks, forgiveness, and mercy from Him. And 
Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Yielding to Oppression 


97. When the angels seize the souls of those who have wronged 
themselves'2!£!_scolding them, “What do you think you were doing?” they 
will reply, “We were oppressed in the land.” The angels will respond, “Was 
Allah’s earth not spacious enough for you to emigrate?” It is they who will 
have Hell as their home—what an evil destination! 98. Except helpless 
men, women, and children who cannot afford a way out— 99. it is right to 
hope that Allah will pardon them. For Allah is Ever-Pardoning, All- 
Forgiving. 


Migrating in Allah’s Cause 
100. Whoever emigrates in the cause of Allah will find many safe havens 
and bountiful resources throughout the earth. Those who leave their homes 
and die while emigrating to Allah and His Messenger—their reward has 
already been secured with Allah. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 


Shortening Prayers 
101. When you travel through the land, it is permissible for you to shorten 
the prayer'#!Zl—"especially’ if you fear an attack by the disbelievers. 
Indeed, the disbelievers are your sworn enemies. 


Praying in a State of Fear 

102. When you "O Prophet’ are ‘campaigning’ with them and you lead them 
in prayer, let one group of them pray with you—while armed. When they 
prostrate themselves, let the other group stand guard behind them. Then the 
group that has not yet prayed will then join you in prayer—and let them be 
vigilant and armed.'248! The disbelievers would wish to see you neglect 
your weapons and belongings, so they could launch a sweeping assault on 
you. But there is no blame if you lay aside your weapons when overcome 
by heavy rain or illness—but take precaution. Indeed, Allah has prepared a 
humiliating punishment for the disbelievers. 103. When the prayers are 
over, remember Allah—whether you are standing, sitting, or lying down. 
But when you are secure, establish regular prayers. Indeed, performing 
prayers is a duty on the believers at the appointed times. 


Diligence Against the Enemy 
104. Do not falter in pursuit of the enemy—if you are suffering, they too are 
suffering. But you can hope to receive from Allah what they can never hope 


for. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Justice to a Jew!2121. 


105. Indeed, We have sent down the Book to you "O Prophet’ in truth to 
judge between people by means of what Allah has shown you. So do not be 
an advocate for the deceitful. 106. And seek Allah’s forgiveness—indeed, 
Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 107. Do not advocate for those who 
wrong themselves.!229! Surely Allah does not like those who are deceitful, 
sinful. 108. They try to hide "their deception’ from people, but they can 
never hide it from Allah—in Whose presence they plot by night what is 
displeasing to Him. And Allah is Fully Aware of what they do. 109. Here 
you are! You ‘believers’ are advocating for them in this life, but who will 
"dare to’ advocate for them before Allah on the Day of Judgment? Or who 
will come to their defence? 


After Sin 
110. Whoever commits evil or wrongs themselves then seeks Allah’s 
forgiveness will certainly find Allah All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 111. 
And whoever commits a sin—it is only to their own loss. Allah is All- 
Knowing, All-Wise. 112. And whoever commits an evil or sinful deed then 
blames it on an innocent person, they will definitely bear the guilt of 
slander and blatant sin. 


Allah’s Grace to the Prophet 
113. Had it not been for Allah’s grace and mercy, a group of them would 
have sought to deceive you "O Prophet’. Yet they would deceive none but 
themselves, nor can they harm you in the least. Allah has revealed to you 
the Book and wisdom and taught you what you never knew. Great ‘indeed’ 
is Allah’s favour upon you! 


Secret Talks 
114. There is no good in most of their secret talks—except those 
encouraging charity, kindness, or reconciliation between people. And 
whoever does this seeking Allah’s pleasure, We will grant them a great 
reward. 


Opposing the Messenger 
115. And whoever defies the Messenger after guidance has become clear to 
them and follows a path other than that of the believers, We will let them 


pursue what they have chosen, then burn them in Hell—what an evil end! 


Unforgivable Sin 
116. Surely Allah does not forgive associating ‘others’ with Him ‘in 
worship’,!224! but forgives anything else of whoever He wills. Indeed, 
whoever associates ‘others’ with Allah has clearly gone far astray. 


Satan’s Allies 

117. Instead of Allah, they only invoke female gods!222! and they “actually” 
invoke none but a rebellious Satan— 118. cursed by Allah—who said, “I 
will surely take hold of a certain number of Your servants. 119. I will 
certainly mislead them and delude them with empty hopes. Also, I will 
order them and they will slit the ears of cattle!223! and alter Allah’s 
creation.” And whoever takes Satan as a guardian instead of Allah has 
certainly suffered a tremendous loss. 120. Satan only makes them ‘false’ 
promises and deludes them with ‘empty’ hopes. Truly Satan promises them 
nothing but delusion. 121. It is they who will have Hell as their home, and 
they will find no escape from it! 


Reward of the Believers 
122. And those who believe and do good, We will soon admit them into 
Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. Allah’s 
promise is ‘always’ true. And whose word is more truthful than Allah’s? 


Doing, Not Wishing 
123. "Divine grace is’ neither by your wishes nor those of the People of the 
Book! Whoever commits evil will be rewarded accordingly, and they will 
find no protector or helper besides Allah. 124. But those who do good— 
whether male or female—and have faith will enter Paradise and will never 
be wronged “even as much as’ the speck on a date stone. 


Abraham’s Way 
125. And who is better in faith than those who ‘fully’ submit themselves to 
Allah, do good, and follow the Way of Abraham, the upright? Allah chose 
Abraham as a close friend. 126. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs whatever is in the 
heavens and whatever is on the earth. And Allah is Fully Aware of 
everything. 


Caring for Female Orphans 


127. They ask you "O Prophet’ regarding women. Say, “It is Allah Who 
instructs you regarding them. Instruction has ‘already’ been revealed in the 
Book!24! concerning the orphan women you deprive of their due rights!225! 
but still wish to marry, also helpless children, as well as standing up for 
orphans’ rights. And whatever good you do is certainly well known to 
Allah.” 


Reconciling Married Couples 
128. If a woman fears indifference or neglect from her husband, there is no 
blame on either of them if they seek ‘fair’ settlement, which is best. Humans 
are ever inclined to selfishness.'22°! But if you are gracious and mindful ‘of 
Allah’, surely Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 


Maintaining Justice Among Wives 
129. You will never be able to maintain ‘emotional’ justice between your 
wives—no matter how keen you are. So do not totally incline towards one 
leaving the other in suspense.'222! And if you do what is right and are 
mindful ‘of Allah’, surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 130. But if 
they choose to separate, Allah will enrich both of them from His bounties. 
And Allah is Ever-Bountiful, All-Wise. 


Allah’s Might and Grace 

131. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on 
the earth. Indeed, We have commanded those given the Scripture before 
you, as well as you, to be mindful of Allah. But if you disobey, then "know 
that’ to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And Allah is 
Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. 132. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs whatever is in 
the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And Allah is sufficient as a 
Trustee of Affairs. 133. If it is His Will, He can remove you altogether, O 
humanity, and replace you with others. And Allah is Most Capable to do so. 
134. Whoever desires the reward of this world, then "let them know that’ 
with Allah are the rewards of this world and the Hereafter. And Allah is 
All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 


Standing up for Justice 
135. O believers! Stand firm for justice as witnesses for Allah even if it is 
against yourselves, your parents, or close relatives. Be they rich or poor, 
Allah is best to ensure their interests. So do not let your desires cause you to 


deviate ‘from justice’. If you distort the testimony or refuse to give it, then 
"know that’ Allah is certainly All-Aware of what you do. 


True Belief 
136. O believers! Have faith in Allah, His Messenger, the Book He has 
revealed to His Messenger, and the Scriptures He revealed before. Indeed, 
whoever denies Allah, His angels, His Books, His messengers, and the Last 
Day has clearly gone far astray. 


Warning Against Hypocrites 
137. Indeed, those who believed then disbelieved, then believed and again 
disbelieved— only’ increasing in disbelief—Allah will neither forgive them 
nor guide them to the ‘Right’ Way. 138. Give good news of a painful 
punishment to hypocrites, 139. who choose disbelievers as allies instead of 
the believers. Do they seek honour and power through that company? 
Surely all honour and power belongs to Allah. 


Shunning Ridiculers 
140. He has already revealed to you in the Book that when you hear Allah’s 
revelations being denied or ridiculed, then do not sit in that company unless 
they engage in a different topic, or else you will be like them.!228! Surely 
Allah will gather the hypocrites and disbelievers all together in Hell. 


Hypocritical Stance 
141. "The hypocrites are’ those who wait to see what happens to you. So if 
Allah grants you victory, they say ‘to you’, “Were we not on your side?” 
But if the disbelievers have a share ‘of victory’, they say ‘to them’, “Did we 
not have the advantage over you, yet we protected you from the believers?” 
Allah will judge between ‘all of’ you on the Day of Judgment. And Allah 
will never grant the disbelievers a way over the believers. 


Qualities of the Hypocrites 
142. Surely the hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but He outwits them. 
When they stand up for prayer, they do it half-heartedly only to be seen by 
people—hardly remembering Allah at all. 143. Torn between belief and 
disbelief—belonging neither to these ‘believers’ nor those “disbelievers”. 
And whoever Allah leaves to stray, you will never find for them a way. 


Unacceptable Guardianship 


144. O believers! Do not take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers. 
Would you like to give Allah solid proof against yourselves? 


Reward of Hypocrites 
145. Surely the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire—and you 
will never find for them any helper— 146. except those who repent, mend 
their ways, hold fast to Allah, and are sincere in their devotion to Allah; 
they will be with the believers. And Allah will grant the believers a great 
reward. 147. Why should Allah punish you if you are grateful and faithful? 
Allah is ever Appreciative, All-Knowing. 


Negativity in Public 
148. Allah does not like negative thoughts to be voiced—except by those 
who have been wronged.'222! Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 149. 
Whether you reveal or conceal a good or pardon an evil—surely Allah is 
Ever-Pardoning, Most Capable. 


Faith in All Prophets 

150. Surely those who deny Allah and His messengers and wish to make a 
distinction between Allah and His messengers, |2201 saying, “We believe in 
some and disbelieve in others,” desiring to forge a compromise, 151. they 
are indeed the true disbelievers. And We have prepared for the disbelievers 
a humiliating punishment. 152. As for those who believe in Allah and His 
messengers—accepting all; rejecting none—He will surely give them their 
rewards. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Moses and the Children of Israel 

153. The People of the Book demand that you "O Prophet’ bring down for 
them a revelation in writing from heaven.!22!! They demanded what is even 
greater than this from Moses, saying, “Make Allah visible to us!” So a 
thunderbolt struck them for their wrongdoing. Then they took the calf for 
worship after receiving clear signs. Still We forgave them for that ‘after 
their repentance’ and gave Moses compelling proof. 154. We raised the 
Mount over them ‘as a warning’ for “breaking” their covenant and said, 
“Enter the gate ‘of Jerusalem’ with humility.” We also warned them, “Do 
not break the Sabbath,” and took from them a firm covenant. 


Falsehood About Mary and Jesus 


155. "They were condemned’ for breaking their covenant, rejecting Allah’s 
signs, killing the prophets unjustly, and for saying, “Our hearts are 
unreceptive!”!232|it is Allah Who has sealed their hearts for their 
disbelief, so they do not believe except for a few— 156. and for their denial 
and outrageous accusation against Mary,!222! 157. and for boasting, “We 
killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the messenger of Allah.” But they 
neither killed nor crucified him—it was only made to appear so.!234! Even 
those who argue for this ‘crucifixion’ are in doubt. They have no knowledge 
whatsoever—only making assumptions. They certainly did not kill him. 
158. Rather, Allah raised him up to Himself. And Allah is Almighty, All- 
Wise. 159. Every one of the People of the Book will definitely believe in 
him before his death.'235! And on the Day of Judgment Jesus will be a 
witness against them. 


Consequences of Disobedience 

160. We forbade the Jews certain foods that had been lawful to them for 
their wrongdoing, and for hindering many from the Way of Allah, 161. 
taking interest despite its prohibition, and consuming people’s wealth 
unjustly. We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful 
punishment. 162. But those of them well-grounded in knowledge, the 
faithful "who" believe in what has been revealed to you "O Prophet’ and 
what was revealed before you— especially’ those who establish prayer— 
and those who pay alms-tax and believe in Allah and the Last Day, to these 
people’ We will grant a great reward. 


Messengers of Islam 

163. Indeed, We have sent revelation to you "O Prophet’ as We sent 
revelation to Noah and the prophets after him. We also sent revelation to 
Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his descendants, ‘as well as’ Jesus, 
Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon. And to David We gave the Psalms. 164. 
There are messengers whose stories We have told you already and others 
We have not. And to Moses Allah spoke directly. 165. "All were’ 
messengers delivering good news and warnings so humanity should have 
no excuse before Allah after "the coming of' the messengers. And Allah is 
Almighty, All-Wise. 


Muhammad's Messengership 


166. Yet ‘if you are denied, O Prophet,’ Allah bears witness to what He has 
sent down to you—He has sent it with His knowledge. The angels too bear 
witness. And Allah ‘alone’ is sufficient as a Witness. 


Punishment for Rejecting the Truth 
167. Those who disbelieve and hinder ‘others’ from the Way of Allah have 
certainly strayed far away. 168. Those who disbelieve and wrong 
themselves—surely Allah will neither forgive them nor guide them to any 
path 169. except that of Hell, to stay there for ever and ever. And that is 
easy for Allah. 


Universality of Islam 
170. O humanity! The Messenger has certainly come to you with the truth 
from your Lord, so believe for your own good. But if you disbelieve, then 
"know that’ to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And 
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Wake-up Call 
171. O People of the Book! Do not go to extremes regarding your faith; say 
nothing about Allah except the truth.!236] The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, 
was no more than a messenger of Allah and the fulfilment of His Word 
through Mary and a spirit "created by a command’ from Him.!222! So 
believe in Allah and His messengers and do not say, “Trinity.” Stop!—for 
your own good. Allah is only One God. Glory be to Him! He is far above 
having a son! To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is 
on the earth. And Allah is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs. 172. The 
Messiah would never be too proud to be a servant of Allah, nor would the 
angels nearest to Allah. Those who are too proud and arrogant to worship 
Him will be brought before Him all together. 


The Reward 
173. As for those who believe and do good, He will reward them in full and 
increase them out of His grace. But those who are too proud and arrogant, 
He will subject them to a painful punishment. And besides Allah they will 
find no protector or helper. 


Universal Call to Islam 
174. O humanity! There has come to you conclusive evidence from your 
Lord. And We have sent down to you a brilliant light. 175. As for those who 


believe in Allah and hold fast to Him, He will admit them into His mercy 
and grace and guide them to Himself through the Straight Path. 


Inheritance Law 6) Full Siblings!238! 
176. They ask you ‘for a ruling, O Prophet’. Say, “Allah gives you a ruling 
regarding those who die without children or parents.” If a man dies 
childless and leaves behind a sister, she will inherit one-half of his estate, 
whereas her brother will inherit all of her estate if she dies childless. If this 
person leaves behind two sisters, they together will inherit two-thirds of the 
estate. But if the deceased leaves male and female siblings, a male’s share 
will be equal to that of two females. Allah makes ‘this’ clear to you so you 
do not go astray. And Allah has “perfect” knowledge of all things.!22! 
kkk 


5. The Spread Table 
(Al-Ma'idah) 


This Medinian sirah takes its name from the story of the table mentioned in 
verses 112-115. Several rulings are laid out, including permissible and 
prohibited foods, hunting while on pilgrimage, and making a bequest while 
travelling. A reference is made to Allah’s covenants with the Jews and 
Christians and how those covenants were repeatedly violated. The believers 
areyragd to comply with Allah’s judgment as communicated by the Prophet 
(o e) Some topics that have been touched on in the previous sûrahs are 
Cis ed here, including making up for “Gita ken oath, the sanctity of the 
human life, and the humanity of Jesus ( Ae) 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Honouring Obligations 
1. O believers! Honour your obligations. All grazing livestock has been 
made lawful to you—except what is hereby announced to you and hunting 
while on pilgrimage. Indeed, Allah commands what He wills. 


Allah’s Sanctities 

2. O believers! Do not violate Allah’s rituals ‘of pilgrimage’, the sacred 
months, the sacrificial animals, the ‘offerings decorated with’ garlands, nor 
those ‘pilgrims’ on their way to the Sacred House seeking their Lord’s 
bounty and pleasure. When pilgrimage has ended, you are allowed to hunt. 
Do not let the hatred of a people who once barred you from the Sacred 
Mosque provoke you to transgress. Cooperate with one another in goodness 
and righteousness, and do not cooperate in sin and transgression. And be 
mindful of Allah. Surely Allah is severe in punishment. 


Forbidden Foods 
3. Forbidden to you are carrion, blood, and swine; what is slaughtered in the 
name of any other than Allah; what is killed by strangling, beating, a fall, or 
by being gored to death; what is partly eaten by a predator unless you 
slaughter it; and what is sacrificed on altars. You are also forbidden to draw 
lots for decisions.!2“2! This is all evil. Today the disbelievers have given up 


all hope of ‘undermining’ your faith. So do not fear them; fear Me! Today I 
have perfected your faith for you, completed My favour upon you, and 
chosen Islam as your way. But whoever is compelled by extreme hunger— 
not intending to sin—then surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Lawful Foods 
4. They ask you, "O Prophet,’ what is permissible for them ‘to eat’. Say, 
“What is good and lawful. Also what is caught by your hunting animals and 
birds of prey which you have trained as instructed by Allah. So eat what 
they catch for you, but mention the Name of Allah over it ‘first’.” And be 
mindful of Allah. Surely Allah is swift in reckoning. 


What to Eat and Who to Marry 

5. Today all good, pure foods have been made lawful for you. Similarly, the 
food of the People of the Book'24!! is permissible for you and yours is 
permissible for them. And ‘permissible for you in marriage’ are chaste 
believing women as well as chaste women of those given the Scripture 
before you—as long as you pay them their dowries in wedlock, neither 
fornicating nor taking them as mistresses. And whoever rejects the faith, all 
their good deeds will be void ‘in this life’ and in the Hereafter they will be 
among the losers. 


Purification Before Prayer 

6. O believers! When you rise up for prayer, wash your faces and your 
hands up to the elbows, wipe your heads, and wash your feet to the ankles. 
And if you are in a state of "full" impurity,!2“2! then take a full bath. But if 
you are ill, on a journey, or have relieved yourselves, or have been intimate 
with your wives and cannot find water, then purify yourselves with clean 
earth by wiping your faces and hands.!243! It is not Allah’s Will to burden 
you, but to purify you and complete His favour upon you, so perhaps you 
will be grateful. 


Allah’s Favour to the Believers 
7. Remember Allah’s favour upon you and the covenant He made with you 
when you said, “We hear and obey.” And be mindful of Allah. Surely Allah 
knows best what is “hidden” in the heart. 


Be Just 


8. O believers! Stand firm for Allah and bear true testimony. Do not let the 
hatred of a people lead you to injustice. Be just! That is closer to 
righteousness. And be mindful of Allah. Surely Allah is All-Aware of what 
you do. 


Reward of Belief and Disbelief 
9. Allah has promised those who believe and do good ‘His’ forgiveness and 
a great reward. 10. As for those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, they 
are the residents of the Hellfire. 


Believers Saved from Harm 
11. O believers! Remember Allah’s favour upon you: when a people sought 
to harm you, but He held their hands back from you. Be mindful of Allah. 
And in Allah let the believers put their trust. 


Allah’s Covenant with the Israelites 
12. Allah made a covenant with the Children of Israel and appointed twelve 
leaders from among them and ‘then’ said, “I am truly with you. If you 
establish prayer, pay alms-tax, believe in My messengers, support them, and 
lend to Allah a good loan, I will certainly forgive your sins and admit you 
into Gardens under which rivers flow. And whoever among you disbelieves 
afterwards has truly strayed from the Right Way.” 


The Covenant Is Broken 
13. But for breaking their covenant, We condemned them and hardened 
their hearts. They distorted the words of the Scripture and neglected a 
portion of what they had been commanded to uphold. You "O Prophet’ will 
always find deceit on their part, except for a few. But pardon them and bear 
with them. Indeed, Allah loves the good-doers. 


Covenant with Christians Broken Too 
14. And from those who say, “We are Christians,” We took their covenant, 
but they neglected a portion of what they had been commanded to uphold. 
So We let hostility and enmity arise between them until the Day of 
Judgment, and soon Allah will inform them of all they have done. 


The Prophet’s Mission 
15. O People of the Book! Now Our Messenger has come to you, revealing 
much of what you have hidden of the Scriptures and disregarding much. 
There certainly has come to you from Allah a light and a clear Book 16. 


through which Allah guides those who seek His pleasure to the ways of 
peace, brings them out of darkness and into light by His Will, and guides 
them to the Straight Path. 


Jesus Is Not Allah 
17. Indeed, those who say, “Allah is the Messiah, son of Mary,” have fallen 
into disbelief. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Who has the power to prevent Allah if He 
chose to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, his mother, and everyone in the 
world all together?” To Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens 
and the earth and everything in between. He creates whatever He wills. And 
Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


Children of Allah? 
18. The Jews and the Christians each say, “We are the children of Allah and 
His most beloved!” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Why then does He punish you for 
your sins? No! You are only humans like others of His Own making. He 
forgives whoever He wills and punishes whoever He wills. To Allah ‘alone’ 
belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in 
between. And to Him is the final return.” 


No Excuse 
19. O People of the Book! Our Messenger has indeed come to you, making 
things clear to you after an interval between the messengers so you do not 
say, “There has never come to us a deliverer of good news or a warner.” 
Now there has come to you a deliverer of good news and a warner. And 
Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


The Israelites Ordered to Enter the Holy Land 
20. And ‘remember’ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! 
Remember Allah’s favours upon you when He raised prophets from among 
you, made you sovereign,'~44! and gave you what He had never given 
anyone in the world.'242! 21. O my people! Enter the Holy Land which 
Allah has destined for you ‘to enter’. And do not turn back or else you will 
become losers.” 22. They replied, “O Moses! There is an enormously 
powerful people there, so we will never "be able to’ enter it until they leave. 
If they do, then we will enter!” 23. Two God-fearing men—who had been 
blessed by Allah—said, “Surprise them through the gate. If you do, you will 
certainly prevail. Put your trust in Allah if you are ‘truly’ believers.” 24. 


"Yet' they said, “O Moses! ‘Still’ we will never enter as long as they remain 
there. So go—both you and your Lord—and fight; we are staying right 
here!” 


Forty Years in the Wilderness 
25. Moses pleaded, “My Lord! I have no control over anyone except myself 
and my brother. So set us apart from the rebellious people.” 26. Allah 
replied, “Then this land is forbidden to them for forty years, during which 
they will wander through the land. So do not grieve for the rebellious 
people.” 


Abel and Cain!246! 
27. Relate to them in truth "O Prophet’ the story of Adam’s two sons—how 
each offered a sacrifice: Abel’s offering was accepted while Cain’s was not. 
So Cain threatened, “I will kill you!” His brother replied, “Allah only 
accepts ‘the offering’ of the sincerely devout. 28. If you raise your hand to 
kill me, I will not raise mine to kill you, because I fear Allah—the Lord of 
all worlds. 29. I want to let you bear your sin against me along with your 
other sins, then you will be one of those destined to the Fire. And that is the 
reward of the wrongdoers.” 30. Yet Cain convinced himself to kill his 
brother, so he killed him—becoming a loser. 31. Then Allah sent a crow 
digging ‘a grave’ in the ground ‘for a dead crow’, in order to show him how 
to bury the corpse of his brother. He cried, “Alas! Have I ‘even’ failed to be 


like this crow and bury the corpse of my brother?” So he became regretful. 
[247] 


Value of Human Life 
32. That is why We ordained for the Children of Israel that whoever takes a 
life—unless as a punishment for murder or mischief in the land—it will be 
as if they killed all of humanity; and whoever saves a life, it will be as if 
they saved all of humanity.!248! "Although" Our messengers already came to 
them with clear proofs, many of them still transgressed afterwards through 
the land. 


Anti-Terrorism Law 
33. Indeed, the penalty for those who wage war against Allah and His 
Messenger and spread mischief in the land is death, crucifixion, cutting off 
their hands and feet on opposite sides, or exile from the land. This "penalty" 


is a disgrace for them in this world, and they will suffer a tremendous 
punishment in the Hereafter.'242! 34. As for those who repent before you 
seize them, then know that Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Closer to Allah 
35. O believers! Be mindful of Allah and seek what brings you closer to 
Him and struggle in His Way, so you may be successful. 


Reward of the Disbelievers 
36. As for the disbelievers, even if they were to possess everything in the 
world twice over ‘and offer it all’ to ransom themselves from the 
punishment of the Day of Judgment, it would never be accepted from them. 
And they will suffer a painful punishment. 37. They will be desperate to get 
out of the Fire but they will never be able to. And they will suffer an 
everlasting punishment. 


Punishment of Theft 
38. As for male and female thieves, cut off their hands for what they have 
done—a deterrent from Allah. And Allah is Almighty, All-Wise.'222! 39, 
But whoever repents after their wrongdoing and mends their ways, Allah 
will surely turn to them in forgiveness. Indeed, Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 


Allah’s Might and Grace 
40. Do you not know that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs 
to Allah ‘alone’? He punishes whoever He wills and forgives whoever He 
wills. And Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


Do Not Be Disheartened 

41. O Messenger! Do not grieve for those who race to disbelieve—those 
who say, “We believe” with their tongues, but their hearts are in disbelief. 
Nor those among the Jews who eagerly listen to lies, attentive to those who 
are too arrogant to come to you. They distort the Scripture, taking rulings 
out of context, then say, “If this is the ruling you get “from Muhammad’, 
accept it. If not, beware!” Whoever Allah allows to be deluded, you can 
never be of any help to them against Allah. It is not Allah’s Will to purify 
their hearts. For them there is disgrace in this world, and they will suffer a 
tremendous punishment in the Hereafter. 


Fair Judgment 


42. They eagerly listen to falsehood and consume forbidden gain.!22!! So if 
they come to you "O Prophet’, either judge between them or turn away from 
them. If you turn away from them, they cannot harm you whatsoever. But if 
you judge between them, then do so with justice. Surely Allah loves those 
who are just. 43. But why do they come to you for judgment when they 
‘already’ have the Torah containing Allah’s judgment, then they turn away 
after all? They are not ‘true’ believers. 


Judging by the Torah 

44. Indeed, We revealed the Torah, containing guidance and light, by which 
the prophets, who submitted themselves to Allah, made judgments for Jews. 
So too did the rabbis and scholars judge according to Allah’s Book, with 
which they were entrusted and of which they were made keepers. So do not 
fear the people; fear Me! Nor trade my revelations for a fleeting gain. And 
those who do not judge by what Allah has revealed are ‘truly’ the 
disbelievers. 


Justice System 
45. We ordained for them in the Torah, “A life for a life, an eye for an eye, a 
nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth—and for wounds equal 
retaliation.” But whoever waives it charitably, it will be atonement for 
them. And those who do not judge by what Allah has revealed are ‘truly’ 
the wrongdoers. 
Judging by the Gospel 

46. Then in the footsteps of the prophets, We sent Jesus, son of Mary, 
confirming the Torah revealed before him. And We gave him the Gospel 
containing guidance and light and confirming what was revealed in the 
Torah—a guide and a lesson to the God-fearing. 47. So let the people of the 
Gospel judge by what Allah has revealed in it. And those who do not judge 
by what Allah has revealed are ‘truly’ the rebellious. 


Judging by the Quran 
48. We have revealed to you "O Prophet’ this Book with the truth, as a 
confirmation of previous Scriptures and a supreme authority on them. So 
judge between them by what Allah has revealed, and do not follow their 
desires over the truth that has come to you. To each of you We have 
ordained a code of law and a way of life. If Allah had willed, He would 


have made you one community, but His Will is to test you with what He has 
given ‘each of' you. So compete with one another in doing good. To Allah 
you will all return, then He will inform you ‘of the truth’ regarding your 
differences. 


Allah’s Judgment 

49. And judge between them "O Prophet" by what Allah has revealed, and 
do not follow their desires. And beware, so they do not lure you away from 
some of what Allah has revealed to you. If they turn away ‘from Allah’s 
judgment’, then know that it is Allah’s Will to repay them for some of their 
sins, and that many people are indeed rebellious. 50. Is it the judgment of 
"pre-Islamic" ignorance they seek? Who could be a better judge than Allah 
for people of sure faith? 


Hypocrites’ Guardians 

51. O believers! Take neither Jews nor Christians as guardians—they are 
guardians of each other.'252! Whoever does so will be counted as one of 
them. Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people. 52. You see 
those with sickness in their hearts racing for their guardianship, saying "in 
justification’, “We fear a turn of fortune will strike us.” But perhaps Allah 
will bring about ‘your’ victory or another favour by His command, and they 
will regret what they have hidden in their hearts. 53. ‘Only then,’ the 
believers will ask "one another’, “Are these the ones who swore solemn 
oaths by Allah that they were with you?” Their deeds have been in vain, so 
they have become losers. 


True Believers 
54. O believers! Whoever among you abandons their faith, Allah will 
replace them with others who love Him and are loved by Him. They will be 
humble with the believers but firm towards the disbelievers, struggling in 
the Way of Allah; fearing no blame from anyone. This is the favour of 
Allah. He grants it to whoever He wills. And Allah is All-Bountiful, All- 
Knowing. 


True Guardianship 
55. Your only guardians are Allah, His Messenger, and fellow believers— 
who establish prayer and pay alms-tax with humility. 56. Whoever allies 


themselves with Allah, His Messenger, and fellow believers, then it is 
certainly Allah’s party that will prevail. 


Unacceptable Guardianship 
57. O believers! Do not seek the guardianship of those given the Scripture 
before you and the disbelievers who have made your faith a mockery and 
amusement. And be mindful of Allah if you are ‘truly’ believers. 58. When 
you call to prayer, they mock it in amusement. This is because they are a 
people without understanding. 


Who Deserves Resentment? 
59. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O People of the Book! Do you resent us only because 
we believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us and what was 
revealed before—while most of you are rebellious?” 60. Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Shall I inform you of those who deserve a worse punishment from Allah 
‘than the rebellious’? It is those who earned Allah’s condemnation and 
displeasure—some being reduced to apes and pigs'2°3! and worshippers of 
false gods. These are far worse in rank and farther astray from the Right 
Way.” 
Hypocrites Among Jews 

61. When they come to you ‘believers’ they say, “We believe.” But they are 
committed to disbelief when they enter and when they leave. And Allah 
knows what they hide. 62. You see many of them racing towards sin, 
transgression, and consumption of forbidden gain. Evil indeed are their 
actions! 63. Why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them from saying 
what is sinful and consuming what is unlawful? Evil indeed is their 
inaction! 


Allah Is Ever Generous 

64. "Some among’ the Jews said, “Allah is tight-fisted.”!294! May their fists 
be tied and they be condemned for what they said. Rather, He is open- 
handed, giving freely as He pleases. That which has been revealed to you 
"O Prophet’ from your Lord will only cause many of them to increase in 
wickedness and disbelief. We have stirred among them hostility and hatred 
until the Day of Judgment. Whenever they kindle the fire of war, Allah puts 
it out. And they strive to spread corruption in the land. And Allah does not 
like corruptors. 


Worst of Both Worlds 
65. Had the People of the Book only been faithful and mindful ‘of Allah’, 
We would have certainly absolved them of their sins and admitted them into 
the Gardens of Bliss. 66. And had they observed the Torah, the Gospel, and 
what has been revealed to them from their Lord, they would have been 
overwhelmed with provisions from above and below. Some among them are 
upright, yet many do nothing but evil. 


A Messenger’s Duty Is to Convey 
67. O Messenger! Convey everything revealed to you from your Lord. If 
you do not, then you have not delivered His message. Allah will ‘certainly’ 
protect you from the people. Indeed, Allah does not guide the people who 
disbelieve. 


Adherence to Scriptures 
68. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O People of the Book! You have nothing to stand on 
unless you observe the Torah, the Gospel, and what has been revealed to 
you from your Lord.” And your Lord’s revelation to you "O Prophet’ will 
only cause many of them to increase in wickedness and disbelief. So do not 
grieve for the people who disbelieve. 


True Belief in Allah 
69. Indeed, the believers, Jews, Sabians!222! and Christians—whoever 
"truly` believes in Allah and the Last Day and does good, there will be no 
fear for them, nor will they grieve. 


The Israelites Rejecting Messengers 
70. Indeed, We took a covenant from the Children of Israel and sent them 
messengers. Whenever a messenger came to them with what they did not 
desire, they denied some and killed others. 71. They thought there would be 
no consequences, so they turned a blind eye and a deaf ear. Yet Allah turned 
to them in forgiveness ‘after their repentance’, but again many became blind 
and deaf. And Allah is All-Seeing of what they do. 


One God, Not Three 
72. Those who say, “Allah is the Messiah, son of Mary,” have certainly 
fallen into disbelief. The Messiah ‘himself’ said, “O Children of Israel! 
Worship Allah—my Lord and your Lord.” Whoever associates others with 
Allah ‘in worship’ will surely be forbidden Paradise by Allah. Their home 


will be the Fire. And the wrongdoers will have no helpers. 73. Those who 
say, “Allah is one in a Trinity,” have certainly fallen into disbelief. There is 
only One God. If they do not stop saying this, those who disbelieve among 
them will be afflicted with a painful punishment. 


Still Not Too Late 
74. Will they not turn to Allah in repentance and seek His forgiveness? And 
Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Jesus Was Human, Not Divine 
75. The Messiah, son of Mary, was no more than a messenger. "Many’ 
messengers had ‘come and’ gone before him. His mother was a woman of 
truth. They both ate food.'25®! See how We make the signs clear to them, yet 
see how they are deluded ‘from the truth’! 


Follow the Truth 
76. Say, "O Prophet,’ “How can you worship besides Allah those who can 
neither harm nor benefit you? And Allah ‘alone’ is the All-Hearing, All- 
Knowing.” 77. Say, “O People of the Book! Do not go to extremes in your 
faith beyond the truth, nor follow the vain desires of those who went astray 
before ‘you’. They misled many and strayed from the Right Way.” 


Evildoers Among the Israelites 

78. The disbelievers among the Children of Israel were condemned in the 
revelations of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That was for their 
disobedience and violations. 79. They did not forbid one another from 
doing evil. Evil indeed was what they did! 80. You see many of them taking 
the disbelievers!222! as allies. Truly wicked are their misdeeds, which have 
earned them Allah’s wrath. And they will be in everlasting torment. 81. Had 
they believed in Allah, the Prophet, and what has been revealed to him, they 
would have never taken those ‘pagans’ as allies. But most of them are 
rebellious. 


Those Most Gracious Towards Believers 
82. You will surely find the most bitter towards the believers to be the Jews 
and polytheists and the most gracious to be those who call themselves 
Christian. That is because there are priests and monks among them and 
because they are not arrogant. 83. When they listen to what has been 
revealed to the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears for 


recognizing the truth. They say, “Our Lord! We believe, so count us among 
the witnesses. 84. Why should we not believe in Allah and the truth that has 
come to us? And we long for our Lord to include us in the company of the 
righteous.” 85. So Allah will reward them for what they said with Gardens 
under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. And that is the reward of the 
good-doers. 86. As for those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, they will 
be the residents of the Hellfire. 


Be Moderate 
87. O believers! Do not forbid the good things which Allah has made lawful 
for you, and do not transgress. Indeed, Allah does not like transgressors. 88. 
Eat of the good, lawful things provided to you by Allah. And be mindful of 
Allah in Whom you believe. 


Broken Oaths 
89. Allah will not call you to account for your thoughtless oaths, but He 
will hold you accountable for deliberate oaths. The penalty for a broken 
oath is to feed ten poor people from what you normally feed your own 
family, or to clothe them, or to free a bondsperson. But if none of this is 
affordable, then you must fast three days. This is the penalty for breaking 
your oaths. So be mindful of your oaths. This is how Allah makes things 
clear to you, so perhaps you will be grateful. 


Forbidden Items 

90. O believers! Intoxicants, gambling, idols, and drawing lots for 
decisions!252! are all evil of Satan’s handiwork. So shun them so you may 
be successful. 91. Satan’s plan is to stir up hostility and hatred between you 
with intoxicants and gambling and to prevent you from remembering Allah 
and praying. Will you not then abstain? 92. Obey Allah and obey the 
Messenger and beware! But if you turn away, then know that Our 
Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ‘the message’ clearly. 


The Past Is Forgiven 
93. There is no blame on those who believe and do good for what they had 
consumed before ‘the prohibition’, as long as they fear Allah, have faith, 
and do what is good; then they believe and act virtuously, then become fully 
mindful ‘of Allah’ and do righteous deeds. For Allah loves the good-doers. 


Hunting While on Pilgrimage 


94. O believers! Allah will surely test you with game within the reach of 
your hands and spears to distinguish those who fear Him in secret. Whoever 
transgresses from now on will suffer a painful punishment. 95. O believers! 
Do not kill game while on pilgrimage. Whoever kills game intentionally 
must compensate by offering its equivalence—as judged by two just men 
among you—to be offered at the Sacred House, or by feeding the needy, or 
by fasting so that they may taste the consequences of their violations. Allah 
has forgiven what has been done. But those who persist will be punished by 
Allah. And Allah is Almighty, capable of punishment. 


Seafood Is Lawful 
96. It is lawful for you to hunt and eat seafood, as a provision for you and 
for travellers. But hunting on land is forbidden to you while on pilgrimage. 
Be mindful of Allah to Whom you all will be gathered. 
Pilgrimage Symbols 

97. Allah has made the Ka’bah—the Sacred House—a sanctuary of well- 
being for all people, along with the sacred months, the sacrificial animals, 
and the ‘offerings decorated with’ garlands. All this so you may know that 
Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and 
that He has ‘perfect’ knowledge of everything. 98. Know that Allah is 
severe in punishment and that He is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 99. The 
Messenger’s duty is only to deliver "the message’. And Allah ‘fully’ knows 
what you reveal and what you conceal. 


Good and Evil Not Equal 
100. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Good and evil are not equal, though you may be 
dazzled by the abundance of evil. So be mindful of Allah, O people of 
reason, so you may be successful.” 


Unnecessary Questions!229! 
101. O believers! Do not ask about any matter which, if made clear to you, 
may disturb you. But if you inquire about what is being revealed in the 
Quran, it will be made clear to you. Allah has forgiven what was done ‘in 
the past”.!282] And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Forbearing. 102. Some 
people before you asked such questions then denied their answers. 


Camels Dedicated to Idols 


103. Allah has never ordained the ‘so-called’ bahirah, sd'ibah, wasilah, and 
ham camels.'2&] But the disbelievers!2®2! just fabricate lies about Allah, 
and most of them lack understanding. 104. When it is said to them, “Come 
to Allah’s revelations and to the Messenger,” they reply, “What we found 
our forefathers practicing is good enough for us.” "Would they still do so,’ 
even if their forefathers had absolutely no knowledge or guidance? 


Everyone Accountable for Themselves 
105. O believers! You are accountable only for yourselves.'2! It will not 
harm you if someone chooses to deviate—as long as you are ‘rightly’ 
guided. To Allah you will all return, and He will inform you of what you 
used to do. 
Verifying Bequests 

106. O believers! When death approaches any of you, call upon two just 
Muslim men to witness as you make a bequest; otherwise, two non- 
Muslims if you are afflicted with death while on a journey.'2™! If you doubt 
‘their testimony’, keep them after prayer and let them testify under oath 
‘saying’, “By Allah! We would never sell our testimony for any price, even 
in favour of a close relative, nor withhold the testimony of Allah. 
Otherwise, we would surely be sinful.” 107. If they are found guilty ‘of 
false testimony’, let the deceased’s two closest heirs affected by the bequest 
replace the witnesses and testify under oath ‘saying’, “By Allah! Our 
testimony is truer than theirs. We have not transgressed. Otherwise, we 
would surely be wrongdoers.” 108. In this way it is more likely that 
witnesses will give true testimony or else fear that their oaths could be 
refuted by those of the heirs. Be mindful of Allah and obey. For Allah does 
not guide the rebellious people. 


Allah Asking the Messengers 
109. ‘Consider’ the Day Allah will gather the messengers and say, “What 
response did you receive?” They will reply, “We have no knowledge 
“compared to You"! You ‘alone’ are indeed the Knower of all unseen.” 


Allah’s Favours upon Jesus 
110. And ‘on Judgment Day’ Allah will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary! 
Remember My favour upon you and your mother: how I supported you 
with the holy spirit!285! so you spoke to people in ‘your’ infancy and 


adulthood. How I taught you writing, wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel. 
How you moulded a bird from clay—by My Will—and breathed into it and 
it became a ‘real’ bird—by My Will. How you healed the blind and the 
lepers—by My Will. How you brought the dead to life—by My Will. How I 
prevented the Children of Israel from harming you when you came to them 
with clear proofs and the disbelievers among them said, “This is nothing but 
pure magic.” 111. And how I inspired the disciples, “Believe in Me and My 
messenger!” They declared, “We believe and bear witness that we fully 
submit "to Allah”. ”[266] 


Miracle of the Table 

112. "Remember’ when the disciples asked, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Would 
your Lord be willing to send down to us a table spread with food from 
heaven?” Jesus answered, “Fear Allah if you are ‘truly’ believers.” 113. 
They said, “We ‘only’ wish to eat from it to reassure our hearts, to verify 
you are indeed truthful to us, and to become its witnesses.” 114. Jesus, son 
of Mary, prayed, “O Allah, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread 
with food as a feast for us—the first and last of us—and as a sign from You. 
Provide for us! You are indeed the Best Provider.” 115. Allah answered, “I 
am sending it down to you. But whoever among you denies afterwards will 
be subjected to a torment I have never inflicted on anyone of My creation.” 


Jesus Denying Claim to Divinity 
116. And "on Judgment Day’ Allah will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Did 
you ever ask the people to worship you and your mother as gods besides 
Allah?” He will answer, “Glory be to You! How could I ever say what I had 
no right to say? If I had said such a thing, you would have certainly known 
it. You know what is "hidden’* within me, but I do not know what is within 
You. Indeed, You ‘alone’ are the Knower of all unseen. 117. I never told 
them anything except what You ordered me to say: “Worship Allah—my 
Lord and your Lord!” And I was witness over them as long as I remained 
among them. But when You took me,|2£2] You were the Witness over them 
—and You are a Witness over all things. 118. If You punish them, they 
belong to You after all.'268! But if You forgive them, You are surely the 
Almighty, All-Wise.” 119. Allah will declare, “This is the Day when ‘only’ 
the faithful will benefit from their faithfulness. Theirs are Gardens under 
which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. Allah is pleased with 


them and they are pleased with Him. That is the ultimate triumph.” 120. To 
Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and 
everything within. And He is Most Capable of everything. 

kkk 


6. Cattle 
(Al-An’am) 


Like the previous stirah, this Meccan sûrah masterfully demonstrates 
Allah’s power and knowledge, and thoroughly refutes pagan beliefs and 
unfounded practices, including animal offerings to the idols. Permissible 
and prohibited foods are explained in more detail than in the previous 
surah. The nature of prophethood is defined, making it clear that 
messengers cannot do anything without the Will of Allah. This stirah begins 
by highlighting Allah’s authority, just like the ending of the previous sûrah, 
and concludes by emphasizing accountability for one’s deeds, just like the 
beginning of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Rejecting the Almighty 

1. All praise is for Allah Who created the heavens and the earth and made 
darkness and light.'22! Yet the disbelievers set up equals to their Lord "in 
worship”. 2. He is the One Who created you from clay,!22! then appointed a 
term ‘for your death’ and another known only to Him ‘for your resurrection’ 
—yet you continue to doubt! 3. He is the Only True God in the heavens and 
the earth. He knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal, and 
knows whatever you do. 


Taking Allah’s Signs Lightly 
4. Whenever a sign comes to them from their Lord, they turn away from it. 
5. They have indeed rejected the truth when it came to them, so they will 
soon face the consequences of their ridicule. 


Fate of the Deniers 
6. Have they not seen how many ‘disbelieving’ peoples We destroyed 
before them? We had made them more established in the land than you. We 
sent down abundant rain for them and made rivers flow at their feet. Then 
We destroyed them for their sins and replaced them with other peoples. 


Demanding Written Scripture!2#! 


7. Had We sent down to you "O Prophet’ a revelation in writing and they 
were to touch it with their own hands, the disbelievers would still have said, 
“This is nothing but pure magic!” 


Demanding to See an Angel 
8. They say, “Why has no ‘visible’ angel come with him?” Had We sent 
down an angel, the matter would have certainly been settled ‘at once’,!222! 
and they would have never been given more time "to repent’. 9. And if We 
had sent an angel, We would have certainly made it "assume the form of" a 


man—leaving them more confused than they already are. 


Fate of the Ridiculers 
10. "Other’ messengers had already been ridiculed before you "O Prophet’, 
but those who mocked them were overtaken by what they used to ridicule. 
11. Say, “Travel throughout the land and see the fate of the deniers.” 


Allah Almighty 
12. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “To whom belongs everything in the heavens 
and the earth?” Say, “To Allah!” He has taken upon Himself to be Merciful. 
He will certainly gather ‘all of’ you together for the Day of Judgment— 
about which there is no doubt. But those who have ruined themselves will 
never believe. 13. To Him belongs whatever exists in the day and night. 
And He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Allah Is the Guardian 
14, Say, "O Prophet,’ “Will I take any guardian other than Allah, the 
Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who provides for all and is not in 
need of provision?” Say, “I have been commanded to be the first to submit 
and not be one of the polytheists.” 15. Say, “I truly fear—if I were to 
disobey my Lord—the torment of a tremendous Day.” 16. Whoever is 
spared the torment of that Day will have certainly been shown Allah’s 
mercy. And that is the absolute triumph. 

Allah Reigns Supreme 
17. If Allah touches you with harm, none can undo it except Him. And if 
He touches you with a blessing, He is Most Capable of everything. 18. He 
reigns supreme over His creation. And He is the All-Wise, All-Aware. 


Allah Is the Best Witness 


19. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Who is the best witness?” Say, “Allah is! He is 
a Witness between me and you. And this Quran has been revealed to me so 
that, with it, I may warn you and whoever it reaches. Do you ‘pagans' 
testify that there are other gods besides Allah?” "Then" say, “I will never 
testify ‘to this'!” "And’ say, “There is only One God. And I totally reject 
whatever ‘idols’ you associate with Him.” 


Recognizing the Prophet 
20. Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize him ‘to be a true 
prophet’ as they recognize their own children. Those who have ruined 
themselves will never believe. 21. Who does more wrong than those who 
fabricate lies against Allah or deny His signs? Indeed, the wrongdoers will 
never succeed. 


The Polytheists 
22. "Consider’ the Day We will gather them all together then ask those who 
associated others "with Allah in worship’, “Where are those gods you used 
to claim?” 23. Their only argument will be: “By Allah, our Lord! We were 
never polytheists.” 24. See how they will lie about themselves and how 
those ‘gods’ they fabricated will fail them! 


Disbelievers Turning Away 

25. There are some of them who ‘pretend to’ listen to your recitation ‘of the 
Quran’, but We have cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to 
comprehend it—and deafness in their ears. Even if they were to see every 
sign, they still would not believe in them. The disbelievers would ‘even’ 
come to argue with you, saying, “This ‘Quran’ is nothing but ancient 
fables!” 26. They turn others away from the Prophet and distance 
themselves as well. They ruin none but themselves, yet they fail to perceive 
it. 

Horrified by the Fire 
27. If only you could see when they will be detained before the Fire! They 
will cry, “Oh! If only we could be sent back, we would never deny the signs 
of our Lord and we would ‘surely’ be of the believers.” 28. But no! "They 
only say this" because the truth they used to hide will become all too clear 
to them. Even if they were to be sent back, they would certainly revert to 
what they were forbidden. Indeed they are liars! 


Deniers of the Hereafter 

29. They insisted, “There is nothing beyond this worldly life and we will 
never be resurrected.” 30. But if only you could see when they will be 
detained before their Lord! He will ask ‘them’, “Is this "Hereafter’ not the 
truth?” They will cry, “Absolutely, by our Lord!” He will say, “Then taste 
the punishment for your disbelief.” 31. Losers indeed are those who deny 
the meeting with Allah until the Hour takes them by surprise, then they will 
cry, “Woe to us for having ignored this!” They will bear ‘the burden of" 
their sins on their backs. Evil indeed is their burden! 


Fleeting Enjoyment 
32. This worldly life is no more than play and amusement, but far better is 
the ‘eternal’ Home of the Hereafter for those mindful ‘of Allah’. Will you 
not then understand? 


Not the First Rejected Prophet 
33. We certainly know that what they say grieves you "O Prophet’. It is not 
your honesty they question—it is Allah’s signs that the wrongdoers deny. 
34. Indeed, messengers before you were rejected but patiently endured 
rejection and persecution until Our help came to them. And Allah’s promise 
‘to help’ is never broken. And you have already received some of the 
narratives of these messengers. 


Disbelievers, No Matter What 
35. If you find their denial unbearable, then build—if you can—a tunnel 
through the earth or stairs to the sky to bring them a "more compelling’ 
sign. Had Allah so willed, He could have guided them all. So do not be one 
of those ignorant ‘of this fact’. 


Deaf to the Truth 
36. Only the attentive will respond ‘to your call’. As for the dead, Allah will 
raise them up, then to Him they will ‘all’ be returned. 37. They ask, “Why 
has no ‘other’ sign been sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Allah certainly has the power to send down a sign”—though most of them 
do not know. 


The Animal Kingdom 
38. All living beings roaming the earth and winged birds soaring in the sky 
are communities like yourselves.!223] We have left nothing out of the 


Record.!2“4! Then to their Lord they will be gathered all together. 


Guidance Is from Allah Only 
39. Those who deny Our signs are ‘wilfully’ deaf and dumb—lost in 
darkness. Allah leaves whoever He wills to stray and guides whoever He 
wills to the Straight Way. 


Allah Alone Removes Hardships 
40. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Imagine if you were overwhelmed by Allah’s 
torment or the Hour—would you call upon any other than Allah ‘for help”? 
"Answer me’ if your claims are true! 41. No! He is the only One you would 
call. And if He willed, He could remove the affliction that made you invoke 
Him. Only then will you forget whatever you associate with Him ‘in 


1°99 


worship’. 


Deniers’ Gradual Destruction 

42. Indeed, We have sent messengers before you "O Prophet’ to other 
people who We put through suffering and adversity ‘for their denial’, so 
perhaps they would be humbled. 43. Why did they not humble themselves 
when We made them suffer? Instead, their hearts were hardened, and Satan 
made their misdeeds appealing to them. 44. When they became oblivious to 
warnings, We showered them with everything they desired. But just as they 
became prideful of what they were given, We seized them by surprise, then 
they instantly fell into despair! 45. So the wrongdoers were utterly 
uprooted. And all praise is for Allah—Lord of all worlds. 


Only Allah Can Relieve Affliction 
46. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Imagine if Allah were to take away your 
hearing or sight, or seal your hearts—who else other than Allah could 
restore it?” See "O Prophet’ how We vary the signs, yet they still turn away. 
47. Ask, “Imagine if Allah’s punishment were to overwhelm you with or 
without warning—who would be destroyed other than the wrongdoers?” 


The Messengers’ Duty 
48. We have sent messengers only as deliverers of good news and as 
warners. Whoever believes and does good, there will be no fear for them, 
nor will they grieve. 49. But those who deny Our signs will be afflicted with 
punishment for their rebelliousness. 


No More than a Prophet 


50. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I do not say to you that I possess Allah’s treasuries or 
know the unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel. I only follow what is 
revealed to me.” Say, “Are those blind ‘to the truth" equal to those who can 
see? Will you not then reflect?” 


The Quran as a Warning 
51. Warn with this "Quran’ those who are awed by the prospect of being 
gathered before their Lord—when they will have no protector or intercessor 
besides Him—so perhaps they will be mindful ‘of Him’. 


Influential Meccans vs. Poor Believers!222! 

52. "O Prophet!’ Do not dismiss those "poor believers’ who invoke their 
Lord morning and evening, seeking His pleasure.'226! You are not 
accountable for them whatsoever, nor are they accountable for you. So do 
not dismiss them, or you will be one of the wrongdoers. 53. In this way We 
have tested some by means of others, so those ‘disbelievers’ may say, “Has 
Allah favoured these ‘poor believers’ out of all of us?” Does Allah not best 
recognize the grateful? 54. When the believers in Our revelations come to 
you, say, “Peace be upon you! Your Lord has taken upon Himself to be 
Merciful. Whoever among you commits evil ignorantly ‘or recklessly’ then 
repents afterwards and mends their ways, then Allah is truly All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful.” 55. This is how We make Our signs clear, so the way of the 
wicked may become distinct. 


Only One God 
56. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I have been forbidden to worship those you invoke 
besides Allah.” Say, “I will not follow your desires, for I then would 
certainly be astray and not one of those ‘rightly’ guided.” 


Desperate to Be Destroyed 
57. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Indeed, I stand on a clear proof from my Lord—yet 
you have denied it. That ‘torment’ you seek to hasten is not within my 
power. It is only Allah Who decides ‘its time’. He declares the truth. And 
He is the Best of Judges.” 58. Say ‘also’, “If what you seek to hasten were 
within my power, the matter between us would have already been settled. 
But Allah knows the wrongdoers best.” 


Allah’s Infinite Knowledge 


59. With Him are the keys of the unseen—no one knows them except Him. 
[277] And He knows what is in the land and sea. Not even a leaf falls without 
His knowledge, nor a grain in the darkness of the earth or anything—green 
or dry—but is "written" in a perfect Record.!228! 


Sleep: The Twin Brother of Death 

60. He is the One Who calls back your souls by night and knows what you 
do by day, then revives you daily to complete your appointed term. To Him 
is your ‘ultimate’ return, then He will inform you of what you used to do. 
61. He reigns supreme over all of His creation, and sends recording-angels, 
watching over you. When death comes to any of you, Our angels take their 
soul, never neglecting this duty. 62. Then they are ‘all’ returned to Allah— 
their True Master. Judgment is His ‘alone’. And He is the Swiftest 
Reckoner. 


Allah’s Power 

63. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Who rescues you from the darkest times on land and 
at sea? He ‘alone’ you call upon with humility, openly and secretly: “If You 
rescue us from this, we will be ever grateful.” 64. Say, “Only’ Allah 
rescues you from this and any other distress, yet you associate others with 
Him ‘in worship’.” 65. Say, “He ‘alone’ has the power to unleash upon you 
a torment from above or below you or split you into ‘conflicting’ factions 
and make you taste the violence of one another.” See how We vary the 
signs, so perhaps they will comprehend. 


Deniers of the Truth 
66. Still your people "O Prophet’ have rejected this “Quran’, although it is 
the truth. Say, “I am not a keeper over you.” 67. Every ‘destined’ matter has 
a ‘set’ time to transpire. And you will soon come to know. 


Mockers of the Quran 
68. And when you come across those who ridicule Our revelations, do not 
sit with them unless they engage in a different topic. Should Satan make 
you forget, then once you remember, do not ‘continue to’ sit with the 
wrongdoing people. 69. Those mindful ‘of Allah’ will not be accountable 
for those ‘who ridicule it’ whatsoever—their duty is to advise, so perhaps 
the ridiculers will abstain. 


Way to Salvation 


70. And leave those who take this!279! faith "of Islam” as mere play and 
amusement and are deluded by ‘their’ worldly life. Yet remind them by this 
"Quran", so no one should be ruined for their misdeeds. They will have no 
protector or intercessor other than Allah. Even if they were to offer every 
possible’ ransom, none will be accepted from them. Those are the ones 
who will be ruined for their misdeeds. They will have a boiling drink and 
painful punishment for their disbelief. 


Almighty Allah 

71. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Should we invoke, other than Allah, those 
"idols' which cannot benefit or harm us, and turn back to disbelief after 
Allah has guided us? "If we do so, we will be’ like those disoriented by 
devils in the wilderness, while their companions call them to guidance, 
saying’, ‘Come to us!’ Say, "O Prophet,’ “Allah’s guidance is the ‘only’ 
true guidance. And we are commanded to submit to the Lord of all worlds, 
72. establish prayer, and be mindful of Him. To Him you will all be 
gathered together. 73. He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth 
in truth. On the Day ‘of Judgment’ He will say, ‘Be!’ And there will be! His 
command is truth. All authority is His ‘alone"!282! on the Day the Trumpet 
will be blown.!281! He is the Knower of all—seen or unseen. And He is the 
All-Wise, All-Aware.” 


Abraham Corrects His Father 
74. And ‘remember’ when Abraham said to his father, Azar, “Do you take 
idols as gods? It is clear to me that you and your people are entirely 
misguided.” 
Abraham Refutes Celestial Worship 

75. We also showed Abraham the wonders of the heavens and the earth, so 
he would be sure in faith. 76. When the night grew dark upon him, he saw a 
star and said, “This is my Lord!” But when it set, he said, “I do not love 
things that set.” 77. Then when he saw the moon rising, he said, “This one 
is my Lord!” But when it disappeared, he said, “If my Lord does not guide 
me, I will certainly be one of the misguided people.” 78. Then when he saw 
the sun shining, he said, “This must be my Lord—it is the greatest!” But 
again when it set, he declared, “O my people! I totally reject whatever you 
associate "with Allah in worship’. 79. I have turned my face towards the 


One Who has originated the heavens and the earth—being upright—and I 
am not one of the polytheists.” 


Abraham Debates His People 

80. And his people argued with him. He responded, “Are you arguing with 
me about Allah, while He has guided me? I am not afraid of whatever 
‘idols’ you associate with Him—'none can harm me,’ unless my Lord so 
wills. My Lord encompasses everything in "His knowledge. Will you not 
be mindful? 81. And how should I fear your associate-gods, while you have 
no fear in associating ‘others’ with Allah—a practice He has never 
authorized? Which side has more right to security? "Tell me’ if you really 
know!” 82. It is ‘only’ those who are faithful and do not tarnish their faith 
with falsehood!282! who are guaranteed security and are "rightly" guided. 83. 
This was the argument We gave Abraham against his people. We elevate in 
rank whoever We please. Surely your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing. 


Abraham and Other Noble Prophets 

84. And We blessed him with Isaac and Jacob. We guided them all as We 
previously guided Noah and those among his descendants: David, Solomon, 
Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. This is how We reward the good-doers. 85. 
Likewise, "We guided" Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias, who were all of 
the righteous. 86. "We also guided’ Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot, 
favouring each over other people ‘of their time’. 87. And "We favoured’ 
some of their forefathers, their descendants, and their brothers. We chose 
them and guided them to the Straight Path. 


Prophetic Guidance 

88. This is Allah’s guidance with which He guides whoever He wills of His 
servants. Had they associated others with Him ‘in worship’, their ‘good’ 
deeds would have been wasted. 89. Those were the ones to whom We gave 
the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood. But if these ‘pagans’ disbelieve in 
this ‘message’, then We have already entrusted it to a people who will never 
disbelieve in it.'283! 90. These "prophets" were "rightly" guided by Allah, so 
follow their guidance. Say, “I ask no reward of you for this ‘Quran'—it is a 
reminder to the whole world.” 


Scriptures Denied 


91. And they'28! have not shown Allah His proper reverence when they 
said, “Allah has revealed nothing to any human being.” Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Who then revealed the Book brought forth by Moses as a light and 
guidance for people, which you split into separate sheets—revealing some 
and hiding much? You have been taught through this Quran’ what neither 
you nor your forefathers knew.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Allah ‘revealed it!” 
Then leave them to amuse themselves with falsehood. 


Quran for All 
92. This is a blessed Book which We have revealed—confirming what came 
before it—so you may warn the Mother of Cities!285! and everyone around 
it. Those who believe in the Hereafter ‘truly’ believe in it and guard their 
prayers. 


Fate of the Wicked 

93. Who does more wrong than the one who fabricates lies against Allah or 
claims, “I have received revelations!”—although nothing was revealed to 
them—or the one who says, “I can reveal the like of Allah’s revelations!”? 
If you "O Prophet" could only see the wrongdoers in the throes of death 
while the angels are stretching out their hands ‘saying’, “Give up your 
souls! Today you will be rewarded with the torment of disgrace for telling 
lies about Allah and for being arrogant towards His revelations!” 94. 
"Today' you have come back to Us all alone as We created you the first time 
—leaving behind everything We have provided you with. We do not see 
your intercessors with you—those you claimed were Allah’s partners ‘in 
worship’. All your ties have been broken and all your claims have let you 
down.” 


Allah’s Power of Creation 
95. Indeed, Allah is the One Who causes seeds and fruit stones to sprout. 
He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. That 
is Allah! How can you then be deluded ‘from the truth’? 96. He causes the 
dawn to break, and has made the night for rest and ‘made’ the sun and the 
moon ‘to travel’ with precision. That is the design of the Almighty, All- 
Knowing. 97. And He is the One Who has made the stars as your guide 
through the darkness of land and sea. We have already made the signs clear 
for people who know. 98. And He is the One Who originated you all from a 


single soul,'28°! then assigned you a place to live and another to "be laid to” 
rest. We have already made the signs clear for people who comprehend. 99. 
And He is the One Who sends down rain from the sky—causing all kinds of 
plants to grow—producing green stalks from which We bring forth 
clustered grain. And from palm trees come clusters of dates hanging within 
reach. "There are’ also gardens of grapevines, olives, and pomegranates, 
similar "in shape’ but dissimilar "in taste’. Look at their fruit as it yields and 
ripens! Indeed, in these are signs for people who believe. 


Allah Has No Children 
100. Yet they associate the jinn!282! with Allah "in worship’, even though He 
created them, and they falsely attribute to Him sons!2®8! and daughters!2®9! 
out of ignorance. Glorified and Exalted is He above what they claim! 101. 
"He is’ the Originator of the heavens and earth. How could He have children 
when He has no mate? He created all things and has ‘perfect’ knowledge of 
everything. 
Worship Allah Alone 

102. That is Allah—your Lord! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except 
Him. "He is’ the Creator of all things, so worship Him ‘alone’. And He is 
the Maintainer of everything. 103. No vision can encompass Him, but He 
encompasses all vision. For He is the Most Subtle, All-Aware.!2! 


Call to Humanity 
104. Indeed, there have come to you insights from your Lord. So whoever 
chooses to see, it is for their own good. But whoever chooses to be blind, it 
is to their own loss. And I am not a keeper over you. 105. And so We vary 
our signs to the extent that they will say, “You have studied ‘previous 
scriptures’,”!224] and We make this “Quran” clear for people who know. 


Guidance Is from Allah Alone 
106. "O Prophet!" Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord—there is 
no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him—and turn away from the 
polytheists. 107. Had Allah willed, they would not have been polytheists. 
We have not appointed you as their keeper, nor are you their maintainer. 


Allah Is the Judge 
108. "O believers!” Do not insult what they invoke besides Allah or they 
will insult Allah spitefully out of ignorance. This is how We have made 


each people’s deeds appealing to them. Then to their Lord is their return, 
and He will inform them of what they used to do. 


Signs of No Use 

109. They swear by Allah their most solemn oaths that if a sign were to 
come to them, they would certainly believe in it. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Signs 
are only with Allah.” What will make you ‘believers’ realize that even if a 
sign were to come to them, they still would not believe? 110. We turn their 
hearts and eyes away ‘from the truth’ as they refused to believe at first, 
leaving them to wander blindly in their defiance. 111. Even if We had sent 
them the angels, made the dead speak to them, and assembled before their 
own eyes every sign ‘they demanded’, they still would not have believed— 
unless Allah so willed. But most of them are ignorant ‘of this’. 


The Deception 
112. And so We have made for every prophet enemies—devilish humans 
and jinn—whispering to one another with elegant words of deception. Had 
it been your Lord’s Will, they would not have done such a thing. So leave 
them and their deceit, 113. so that the hearts of those who disbelieve in the 
Hereafter may be receptive to it, be pleased with it, and be persistent in 
their evil pursuits. 


The Perfect Book 
114. "Say, O Prophet,’ “Should I seek a judge other than Allah while He is 
the One Who has revealed for you the Book ‘with the truth’ perfectly 
explained?” Those who were given the Scripture know that it has been 
revealed ‘to you’ from your Lord in truth. So do not be one of those who 
doubt. 115. The Word of your Lord has been perfected in truth and justice. 
None can change His Words. And He is the All-Hearing, All- Knowing. 


Most Are Deviant 
116. "O Prophet!" If you were to obey most of those on earth, they would 
lead you away from Allah’s Way. They follow nothing but assumptions and 
do nothing but lie. 117. Indeed, your Lord knows best who has strayed from 
His Way and who is ‘rightly’ guided. 
Lawful and Unlawful Meat 
118. So eat only of what is slaughtered in Allah’s Name if you truly believe 
in His revelations. 119. Why should you not eat of what is slaughtered in 


Allah’s Name when He has already explained to you what He has forbidden 
to you—except when compelled by necessity? Many ‘deviants’ certainly 
mislead others by their whims out of ignorance. Surely your Lord knows 
the transgressors best. 120. Shun all sin—open and secret. Indeed, those 
who commit sin will be punished for what they earn. 121. Do not eat of 
what is not slaughtered in Allah’s Name. For that would certainly be ‘an act 
of’ disobedience. Surely the devils whisper to their "human" associates to 
argue with you.'222! If you were to obey them, then you ‘too’ would be 
polytheists. 


Metaphor for Believers and Disbelievers 
122. Can those who had been dead, to whom We gave life and a light with 
which they can walk among people, be compared to those in complete 
darkness from which they can never emerge?!223! That is how the misdeeds 
of the disbelievers have been made appealing to them. 123. And so We have 
placed in every society the most wicked to conspire in it. Yet they plot only 
against themselves, but they fail to perceive it. 


Craving Prophethood 
124. Whenever a sign comes to them, they say, “We will never believe until 
we receive what Allah’s messengers received.” Allah knows best where to 
place His message. The wicked will soon be overwhelmed by humiliation 
from Allah and a severe punishment for their evil plots. 


Open and Restricted Hearts 

125. Whoever Allah wills to guide, He opens their heart to Islam. But 
whoever He wills to leave astray, He makes their chest tight and constricted 
as if they were climbing up into the sky. This is how Allah dooms those 
who disbelieve. 126. That is your Lord’s Path—perfectly straight. We have 
already made the signs clear to those who are mindful. 127. They will have 
the Home of Peace with their Lord, Who will be their Guardian because of 
what they used to do. 


Humans and Jinn on Judgment Day 
128. ‘Consider’ the Day He will gather them ‘all’ together and say, “O 
assembly of jinn! You misled humans in great numbers.” And their human 
associates will say, “Our Lord! We benefited from each other’s company, 
[295] but now we have reached the term which You appointed for us.” “Then’ 


He will say, “The Fire is your home, yours to stay in forever, except 
whoever Allah wills to spare.”!225! Surely your Lord is All-Wise, All- 
Knowing. 129. This is how We make the wrongdoers ‘destructive’ allies of 
one another because of their misdeeds. 


Confession of Evil Humans and Jinn 

130. ‘Allah will ask,’ “O assembly of jinn and humans! Did messengers not 
come from among you, proclaiming My revelations and warning you of the 
coming of this Day of yours?” They will say, “We confess against 
ourselves!” For they have been deluded by ‘their’ worldly life. And they 
will testify against themselves that they were disbelievers. 131. This 
"sending of the messengers’ is because your Lord would never destroy a 
society for their wrongdoing while its people are unaware ‘of the truth’. 


The Good and the Evil 
132. They will each be assigned ranks according to their deeds. And your 
Lord is not unaware of what they do. 


Allah Is Not in Need of His Creation 
133. Your Lord is the Self-Sufficient, Full of Mercy. If He wills, He can do 
away with you and replace you with whoever He wills, just as He produced 
you from the offspring of other people. 134. Indeed, what you have been 
promised will certainly come to pass. And you will have no escape. 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 
135. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O my people! Persist in your ways, for I ‘too’ will 
persist in mine. You will soon know who will fare best in the end. Indeed, 
the wrongdoers will never succeed.” 
Unfair Giving!222! 

136. The pagans set aside for Allah a share of the crops and cattle He 
created, saying, “This ‘portion’ is for Allah,” so they claim, “and this ‘one’ 
for our associate-gods.” Yet the portion of their associate-gods is not shared 
with Allah while Allah’s portion is shared with their associate-gods. What 
unfair judgment! 


Self-Destruction!2281. 
137. Likewise, the pagans’ evil associates have made it appealing to them 
to kill their own children—only leading to their destruction as well as 


confusion in their faith. Had it been Allah’s Will, they would not have done 
such a thing. So leave them and their falsehood. 


Idols’ Share in Cattle and Crops 

138. They say, “These cattle and crops are reserved—none may eat them 
except those we permit,” so they claim. Some other cattle are exempted 
from labour and others are not slaughtered in Allah’s Name—falsely 
attributing lies to Him. He will repay them for their lies. 139. They ‘also’ 
say, “The offspring of this cattle is reserved for our males and forbidden to 
our females; but if it is stillborn, they may all share it.” He will repay them 
for their falsehood. Surely He is All-Wise, All-Knowing. 


Lost in Ignorance 
140. Lost indeed are those who have murdered their own children foolishly 
out of ignorance and have forbidden what Allah has provided for them— 
falsely attributing lies to Allah. They have certainly strayed and are not 
‘rightly’ guided. 

Allah’s Bounties 
141. He is the One Who produces gardens—both cultivated and wild!22!— 
and palm trees, crops of different flavours, olives, and pomegranates— 
similar ‘in shape’, but dissimilar "in taste’. Eat from the fruit they bear and 
pay the dues at harvest, but do not waste. Surely He does not like the 
wasteful. 


Four Pairs of Cattle, Male and Female!322. 

142. Some cattle are fit for labour, others are too small. B% Eat of what 
Allah has provided for you and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. Certainly, 
he is your sworn enemy. 143. "Allah has created’ four pairs: a pair of sheep 
and a pair of goats—ask "them, O Prophet’, “Has He forbidden ‘to you’ the 
two males or the two females or what is in the wombs of the two females? 
Tell me with knowledge, if what you say is true.”— 144, and a pair of 
camels and a pair of oxen. Ask ‘them’, “Has He forbidden ‘to you’ the two 
males or the two females or what is in the wombs of the two females? Or 
were you present when Allah gave you this commandment?” Who does 
more wrong than those who fabricate lies against Allah to mislead others 
without ‘any’ knowledge? Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing 
people. 


Meat Forbidden to Muslims 
145. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I do not find in what has been revealed to me 
anything forbidden to eat except carrion, running blood, swine—which is 
impure—or a sinful offering in the name of any other than Allah. But if 
someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding 
immediate need—then surely your Lord is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” 


Meat Forbidden to Jews 
146. For those who are Jewish, We forbade every animal with undivided 
hoofs and the fat of oxen and sheep except what is joined to their backs or 
intestines or mixed with bone. In this way We rewarded them for their 
violations. And We are certainly truthful. 147. But if they deny you "O 
Prophet’, say, “Your Lord is infinite in mercy, yet His punishment will not 
be averted from the wicked people.” 


Free Choice 

148. The polytheists will argue, “Had it been Allah’s Will, neither we nor 
our forefathers would have associated others with Him ‘in worship’ or made 
anything unlawful.” Likewise, those before them rejected the truth until 
they tasted Our punishment. Ask "them, O Prophet’, “Do you have any 
knowledge that you can produce for us? Surely you follow nothing but 
‘false’ assumptions and you do nothing but lie.” 149. Say, “Allah has the 
most conclusive argument. Had it been His Will, He would have easily 
imposed guidance upon all of you.” 150. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Bring your 
witnesses who can testify that Allah has forbidden this.” If they ‘falsely’ 
testify, do not testify with them. And do not follow the desires of those who 
deny Our proofs, disbelieve in the Hereafter, and set up equals with their 
Lord. 


Allah’s Commandments 
151. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Come! Let me recite to you what your Lord has 
forbidden to you: do not associate others with Him ‘in worship’. "Do not fail 
to’ honour your parents. Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We 
provide for you and for them. Do not come near indecencies, openly or 
secretly. Do not take a “human” life—made sacred by Allah—except with 
“legal” right.'222! This is what He has commanded you, so perhaps you will 
understand. 152. And do not come near the wealth of the orphan—unless 
intending to enhance it—until they attain maturity. Give full measure and 


weigh with justice. We never require of any soul more than what it can 
afford. Whenever you speak,!222! maintain justice—even regarding a close 
relative. And fulfil your covenant with Allah. This is what He has 
commanded you, so perhaps you will be mindful. 153. Indeed, that is My 
Path—perfectly straight. So follow it and do not follow other ways, for they 
will lead you away from His Way. This is what He has commanded you, so 
perhaps you will be conscious ‘of Allah’.” 


The Torah 
154. Additionally, We gave Moses the Scripture, completing the favour 
upon those who do good, detailing everything, and as a guide and a mercy, 
so perhaps they would be certain of the meeting with their Lord. 


The Quran 

155. This is a blessed Book We have revealed. So follow it and be mindful 
‘of Allah’, so you may be shown mercy. 156. You ‘pagans’ can no longer 
say, “Scriptures were only revealed to two groups before us and we were 
unaware of their teachings.” 157. Nor can you say, “If only the Scriptures 
had been revealed to us, we would have been better guided than they.” Now 
there has come to you from your Lord a clear proof!2%4!—a guide and 
mercy. Who then does more wrong than those who deny Allah’s revelations 
and turn away from them? We will reward those who turn away from Our 
revelations with a dreadful punishment for turning away. 


Waiting for the Apocalypse? 
158. Are they awaiting the coming of the angels, or your Lord 'Himself’, or 
some of your Lord’s ‘major’ signs? On the Day your Lord’s signs arrive, 
belief will not benefit those who did not believe earlier or those who did no 
good through their faith.'2°5! Say, “Keep waiting! We too are waiting.” 


Not Responsible 
159. Indeed, you "O Prophet’ are not responsible whatsoever for those who 
have divided their faith and split into sects. Their judgment rests only with 
Allah. And He will inform them of what they used to do. 


Reward for Good and Evil Deeds 
160. Whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded tenfold. But 
whoever comes with a bad deed will be punished for only one. None will be 
wronged. 


Way of Life 
161. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Surely my Lord has guided me to the Straight Path, 
a perfect way, the faith of Abraham, the upright, who was not one of the 
polytheists.” 162. Say, “Surely my prayer, my worship, my life, and my 
death are all for Allah—Lord of all worlds. 163. He has no partner. So I am 
commanded, and so I am the first to submit.” 


Divine Justice 
164. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Should I seek a lord other than Allah while He is 
the Lord of everything?” No one will reap except what they sow. No soul 
burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is 
your return, and He will inform you of your differences. 


Test of Life 
165. He is the One Who has placed you as successors on earth and elevated 
some of you in rank over others, so He may test you with what He has 
given you. Surely your Lord is swift in punishment, but He is certainly All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 
kkk 


7. The Heights 
(Al-A’raf) 


This sûrah takes its name from the heights mentioned in verse 46. Like 
many other Meccan sirahs, it recounts the stories of earlier prophets who 
were denied by their own people and how the deniers were eventually 
destroyed. As mentioned in the previgygstirah (6:10-11), these stories are 
meant to reassure the Prophet ( .{z-{;) and warn his people of Allah’s 
torment. The story of Satan’s writ and Adam’s temptation and fall are 
detailed, along with lessons for the believers to beware of Satan’s whispers. 
Details about Paradise and Hell (verses 36-53) here are unmatched by any 
previous sûrah. The powerlessness of idols is further emphasized. Full 
obedience to Allah and His prophets is stressed in this sûrah and the next. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Advice to the Prophet 
1. Alif-LGm-Mim-Sdd. 2. "This is’ a Book sent down to you "O Prophet — 
do not let anxiety into your heart regarding it—so with it you may warn ‘the 
disbelievers“, and as a reminder to the believers. 


Advice to Humanity 
3. Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and do not take 
others as guardians besides Him. How seldom are you mindful! 4. 
‘Imagine’ how many societies We have destroyed! Our torment took them 
by surprise "while sleeping’ at night or midday. 5. Their only cry—when 
overwhelmed by Our torment—was, “We have indeed been wrongdoers.” 


Response to Messengers 
6. We will surely question those who received messengers and We will 
question the messengers ‘themselves’. 7. Then We will give them a full 
account with sure knowledge—for We were never absent. 


Weighing Deeds on Judgment Day 
8. The weighing on that Day will be just. As for those whose scale will be 
heavy ‘with good deeds’, ‘only’ they will be successful. 9. But those whose 


scale is light, they have doomed themselves for wrongfully denying Our 
signs. 


Satan’s Arrogance 

10. We have indeed established you on earth and provided you with a 
means of livelihood. "Yet’ you seldom give any thanks. 11. Surely We 
created you, 3081 then shaped you, then said to the angels, “Prostrate before 
Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblis,'2°Z] who refused to prostrate with the 
others. 12. Allah asked, “What prevented you from prostrating when I 
commanded you?” He replied, “I am better than he is: You created me from 
fire and him from clay.” 13. Allah said, “Then get down from Paradise! It is 
not for you to be arrogant here. So get out! You are truly one of the 
disgraced.” 14. He appealed, “Then delay my end until the Day of their 
resurrection.” 15. Allah said, “You are delayed ‘until the appointed 
Day’. ” 120] 16. He said, “For leaving me to stray I will lie in ambush for 
them on Your Straight Path. 17. I will approach them from their front, their 
back, their right, their left, and then You will find most of them ungrateful.” 
18. Allah said, “Get out of Paradise! You are disgraced and rejected! I will 
certainly fill up Hell with you and your followers all together.” 


Adam and Eve: Temptation and Fall 

19. "Allah said,’ “O Adam! Live with your wife in Paradise and eat from 
wherever you please, but do not approach this tree, or else you will be 
wrongdoers.” 20. Then Satan tempted them in order to expose what was 
hidden of their nakedness. He said, “Your Lord has forbidden this tree to 
you only to prevent you from becoming angels or immortals.” 21. And he 
swore to them, “I am truly your sincere advisor.” 22. So he brought about 
their fall through deception. And when they tasted of the tree, their 
nakedness was exposed to them, prompting them to cover themselves with 
leaves from Paradise. Then their Lord called out to them, “Did I not forbid 
you from that tree and ‘did I not’ tell you that Satan is your sworn enemy?” 
23. They replied, “Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If You do not 
forgive us and have mercy on us, we will certainly be losers.” 24. Allah 
said, “Descend as enemies to each other.'222! You will find in the earth a 
residence and provision for your appointed stay.” 25. He added, “There you 
will live, there you will die, and from there you will be resurrected.” 


Best Clothing 
26. O children of Adam! We have provided for you clothing to cover your 
nakedness and as an adornment. However, the best clothing is 
righteousness. This is one of Allah’s bounties, so perhaps you will be 
mindful. 


Warning Against Satan 
27. O children of Adam! Do not let Satan deceive you as he tempted your 
parents out of Paradise and caused their cover to be removed in order to 
expose their nakedness. Surely he and his soldiers watch you from where 
you cannot see them. We have made the devils allies of those who 
disbelieve. 28. Whenever they commit a shameful deed,'*!2! they say, “We 
found our forefathers doing it and Allah has commanded us to do it.” Say, 
“No! Allah never commands what is shameful. How can you attribute to 
Allah what you do not know?” 29. Say, "O Prophet,’ “My Lord has 
commanded uprightness and dedication ‘to Him alone’ in worship, calling 
upon Him with sincere devotion. Just as He first brought you into being, 
you will be brought to life again.” 30. He has guided some, while others are 
destined to stray. They have taken devils as their masters instead of Allah— 
thinking they are ‘rightly’ guided. 
The Lawful and the Forbidden 

31. O Children of Adam! Dress properly whenever you are at worship. Eat 
and drink, but do not waste. Surely He does not like the wasteful. 32. Ask, 
"O Prophet,’ “Who has forbidden the adornments and lawful provisions 
Allah has brought forth for His servants?” Say, “They are for the enjoyment 
of the believers in this worldly life, but they will be exclusively theirs on 
the Day of Judgment.!2#! This is how We make Our revelations clear for 
people of knowledge.” 33. Say, “My Lord has only forbidden open and 
secret indecencies, sinfulness, unjust aggression, associating ‘others’ with 
Allah "in worship’—a practice He has never authorized—and attributing to 
Allah what you do not know.” 34. For each community there is an 
appointed term. When their time arrives, they can neither delay it for a 
moment, nor could they advance it. 


Receiving the Truth 


35. O children of Adam! When messengers from among yourselves come to 
you reciting My revelations—whoever shuns evil and mends their ways, 
there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 36. But those who 
receive Our revelations with denial and arrogance will be the residents of 
the Fire. They will be there forever. 


Evil Leaders and Their Followers 

37. Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against Allah or 
deny His revelations? They will receive what is destined for them,'*2! until 
Our messenger-angels arrive to take their souls, asking them, “Where are 
those ‘false gods’ you used to invoke besides Allah?” They will cry, “They 
have failed us,” and they will confess against themselves that they were 
indeed disbelievers. 38. Allah will say, “Enter the Fire along with the ‘evil’ 
groups of jinn and humans that preceded you.” Whenever a group enters 
Hell, it will curse the preceding one until they are all gathered inside, the 
followers will say about their leaders, “Our Lord! They have misled us, so 
multiply their torment in the Fire.” He will answer, “It has already been 
multiplied for all, but you do not know.” 39. Then the leaders will say to 
their followers, “You were no better than us! So taste the torment for what 
you used to commit.” 


Punishment of the Disbelievers 
40. Surely those who receive our revelations with denial and arrogance, the 
gates of heaven will not be opened for them, nor will they enter Paradise 
until a camel passes through the eye of a needle. This is how We reward the 
wicked. 41. Hell will be their bed; flames will be their cover. This is how 
We reward the wrongdoers. 


Reward of the Believers 
42. As for those who believe and do good—We never require of any soul 
more than what it can afford—it is they who will be the residents of 
Paradise. They will be there forever. 43. We will remove whatever 
bitterness they had in their hearts.'243! Rivers will flow under their feet. And 
they will say, “Praise be to Allah for guiding us to this. We would have 
never been guided if Allah had not guided us. The messengers of our Lord 
had certainly come with the truth.” It will be announced to them, “This is 
Paradise awarded to you for what you used to do.” 


The Lord’s Promise 
44. The residents of Paradise will call out to the residents of the Fire, “We 
have certainly found our Lord’s promise to be true. Have you too found 
your Lord’s promise to be true?” They will reply, “Yes, we have!” Then a 
caller will announce to both, “May Allah’s condemnation be upon the 
wrongdoers, 45. those who hindered ‘others’ from Allah’s Way, strived to 
make it ‘appear’ crooked, and disbelieved in the Hereafter.” 


People on the Heights!2/4! 

46. There will be a barrier between Paradise and Hell. And on the heights 
"of that barrier” will be people!2/5! who will recognize "the residents of" both 
by their appearance.!2!6! They will call out to the residents of Paradise, 
“Peace be upon you!” They will have not yet entered Paradise, but eagerly 
hope to. 47. When their eyes will turn towards the residents of Hell, they 
will pray, “Our Lord! Do not join us with the wrongdoing people.” 48. 
Those on the heights will call out to some ‘tyrants in the Fire’, who they 
will recognize by their appearance, saying, “Your large numbers and 
arrogance are of no use ‘today’! 49. Are these ‘humble believers’ the ones 
you swore would never be shown Allah’s mercy?” "Finally, those on the 
heights will be told:* “Enter Paradise! There will be no fear for you, nor will 
you grieve.” 


Disbelievers Begging Believers 

50. The residents of the Fire will then cry out to the residents of Paradise, 
“Aid us with some water or any provision Allah has granted you.” They 
will reply, “Allah has forbidden both to the disbelievers, 51. those who took 
this'2!2! faith "of Islam" as mere amusement and play and were deluded by 
‘their’ worldly life.” ‘Allah will say,’ “Today We will ignore them just as 
they ignored the coming of this Day of theirs and for rejecting Our 
revelations.” 


Too Late 
52. We have certainly brought them a Book which We explained with 
knowledge—a guide and mercy for those who believe. 53. Do they only 
await the fulfilment ‘of its warning”? The Day it will be fulfilled, those who 
ignored it before will say, “The messengers of our Lord certainly came with 
the truth. Are there any intercessors who can plead on our behalf? Or can 


we be sent back so we may do ‘good,’ unlike what we used to do?” They 
will have certainly ruined themselves, and whatever ‘gods’ they fabricated 
will fail them. 


The Almighty Creator 

54. Indeed your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six 
Days,'248! then established Himself on the Throne. He makes the day and 
night overlap in rapid succession. He created the sun, the moon, and the 
stars—all subjected by His command. The creation and the command 
belong to Him ‘alone’. Blessed is Allah—Lord of all worlds! 55. Call upon 
your Lord humbly and secretly. Surely He does not like the transgressors. 
56. Do not spread corruption in the land after it has been set in order. And 
call upon Him with hope and fear. Indeed, Allah’s mercy is always close to 
the good-doers. 


Parable of Resurrection 
57. He is the One Who sends the winds ushering in His mercy. When they 
bear heavy clouds, We drive them to a lifeless land and then cause rain to 
fall, producing every type of fruit. Similarly, We will bring the dead to life, 
so perhaps you will be mindful. 


Parable of Believers and Disbelievers 
58. The fertile land produces abundantly by the Will of its Lord, whereas 
the infertile land hardly produces anything. This is how We vary ‘Our’ 
lessons to those who are thankful. 


Prophet Noah 
59. Indeed, We sent Noah to his people. He said, “O my people! Worship 
Allah—you have no other god except Him. I truly fear for you the torment 
of a tremendous Day.” 


His People’s Response 

60. But the chiefs of his people said, “We surely see that you are clearly 
misguided.” 61. He replied, “O my people! I am not misguided! But I am a 
messenger from the Lord of all worlds, 62. conveying to you my Lord’s 
messages and giving you ‘sincere’ advice. And I know from Allah what you 
do not know. 63. Do you find it astonishing that a reminder should come to 
you from your Lord through one of your own, warning you, so you may 
beware and perhaps be shown mercy?” 


The Fate of His People 
64. But they rejected him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark, 
and drowned those who rejected Our signs. They were certainly a blind 
people. 


Prophet Hiid 
65. And to the people of ’Ad We sent their brother Hid. He said, “O my 
people! Worship Allah—you have no other god except Him. Will you not 
then fear Him?” 


His People’s Response 

66. The disbelieving chiefs of his people responded, “We surely see you as 
a fool, and we certainly think you are a liar.” 67. Hid replied, “O my 
people! I am no fool! But I am a messenger from the Lord of all worlds, 68. 
conveying to you my Lord’s messages. And I am your sincere advisor. 69. 
Do you find it astonishing that a reminder should come to you from your 
Lord through one of your own so he may warn you? Remember that He 
made you successors after the people of Noah and increased you greatly in 
stature. So remember Allah’s favours, so you may be successful.” 70. They 
said, “Have you come to us so that we would worship Allah alone and 
abandon what our forefathers used to worship? Then bring us what you 
threaten us with, if what you say is true!” 71. He said, “You will certainly 
be subjected to your Lord’s torment and wrath. Do you dispute with me 
regarding the so-called gods which you and your forefathers have made up 
—a practice Allah has never authorized? Then wait! I too am waiting with 
you.” 


The Fate of His People 
72. So We saved him and those with him by Our mercy and uprooted those 
who denied Our signs. They were not believers. 


Prophet Salih 
73. And to the people of Thamûd We sent their brother Salih. He said, “O 
my people! Worship Allah—you have no other god except Him. A clear 
proof has come to you from your Lord: this is Allah’s she-camel as a sign to 
you. So leave her to graze ‘freely’ on Allah’s land and do not harm her, or 
else you will be overcome by a painful punishment. 74. Remember when 
He made you successors after ’Ad and established you in the land—‘and’ 


you built palaces on its plains and carved homes into mountains. So 
remember Allah’s favours, and do not go about spreading corruption in the 
land.” 


His People’s Response 
75. The arrogant chiefs of his people asked the lowly who believed among 
them, “Are you certain that Salih has been sent by his Lord?” They replied, 
“We certainly believe in what he has been sent with.” 76. The arrogant said, 
“We surely reject what you believe in.” 77. Then they killed the she-camel 
—defying their Lord’s command—and challenged ‘Salih’, “Bring us what 
you threaten us with, if you are ‘truly’ one of the messengers.” 


The Fate of His People 
78. Then an ‘overwhelming’ earthquake struck them, and they fell lifeless in 
their homes. 79. So he turned away from them, saying, “O my people! 
Surely I conveyed to you my Lord’s message and gave you ‘sincere’ advice, 
but you do not like “sincere” advisors.” 


Prophet Lot 
80. And ‘remember’ when Lot scolded ‘the men of’ his people, ‘saying,’ 
“Do you commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before? 81. 
You lust after men instead of women! You are certainly transgressors.” 


His People’s Response 
82. But his people’s only response was to say, “Expel them from your land! 
They are a people who wish to remain chaste!” 


The Fate of His People 
83. So We saved him and his family except his wife, who was one of the 
doomed. 84. We poured upon them a rain ‘of brimstone’. See what was the 
end of the wicked! 


Prophet Shu’aib 
85. And to the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu’aib. He said, “O 
my people! Worship Allah—you have no other god except Him. A clear 
proof has already come to you from your Lord. So give just measure and 
weight, do not defraud people of their property, nor spread corruption in the 
land after it has been set in order. This is for your own good, if you are 
"truly" believers. 86. And do not lie in ambush on every road—threatening 
and hindering those who believe in Allah from His Path and striving to 


make it ‘appear’ crooked. Remember when you were few, then He increased 
you in number. And consider the fate of the corruptors! 87. If some of you 
do believe in what I have been sent with while others do not, then be patient 
until Allah judges between us. He is the Best of Judges.” 


His People’s Response 

88. The arrogant chiefs of his people threatened, “O Shu’aib! We will 
certainly expel you and your fellow believers from our land, unless you 
return to our faith.” He replied, “Even if we hate it? 89. We would surely be 
fabricating a lie against Allah if we were to return to your faith after Allah 
has saved us from it. It does not befit us to return to it unless it is the Will of 
Allah, our Lord. Our Lord has encompassed everything in ‘His’ knowledge. 
In Allah we trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and our people with truth. 
You are the best of those who judge.” 


The Fate of His People 

90. The disbelieving chiefs of his people threatened, “If you follow Shu’aib, 
you will surely be losers!” 91. Then an ‘overwhelming* earthquake struck 
them and they fell lifeless in their homes. 92. Those who rejected Shu’aib 
were ‘wiped out’ as if they had never lived there. Those who rejected 
Shu’aib were the true losers. 93. He turned away from them, saying, “O my 
people! Indeed, I have delivered to you the messages of my Lord and gave 
you ‘sincere’ advice. How can I then grieve for those who chose to 
disbelieve?” 


Destroyed Peoples 
94. Whenever We sent a prophet to a society, We afflicted its "disbelieving’ 
people with suffering and adversity, so perhaps they would be humbled. 95. 
Then We changed their adversity to prosperity until they flourished and 
argued ‘falsely’, “Our forefathers ‘too’ had been visited by adversity and 
prosperity.”!212! So We seized them by surprise, while they were unaware. 


Learn from History 
96. Had the people of those societies been faithful and mindful ‘of Allah’, 
We would have overwhelmed them with blessings from heaven and earth. 
But they disbelieved, so We seized them for what they used to commit. 97. 
Did the people of those societies feel secure that Our punishment would not 
come upon them by night while they were asleep? 98. Or did they feel 


secure that Our punishment would not come upon them by day while they 
were at play? 99. Did they feel secure against Allah’s planning? None 
would feel secure from Allah’s planning except the losers. 100. Is it not 
clear to those who take over the land after ‘the destruction of* its former 
residents that—if We will—We can punish them ‘too’ for their sins and seal 
their hearts so they will not hear ‘the truth’? 


Sealed Hearts 
101. We have narrated to you "O Prophet’ some of the stories of those 
societies. Surely, their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but still 
they would not believe in what they had already denied. This is how Allah 
seals the hearts of the disbelievers. 102. We did not find most of them true 
to their covenant. Rather, We found most of them truly rebellious. 


Prophet Moses 

103. Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his 
chiefs, but they wrongfully rejected them. See what was the end of the 
corruptors! 104. And Moses said, “O Pharaoh! I am truly a messenger from 
the Lord of all worlds, 105. obliged to say nothing about Allah except the 
truth. Indeed, I have come to you with clear proof from your Lord, so let the 
children of Israel go with me.” 106. Pharaoh said, “If you have come with a 
sign, then bring it if what you say is true.” 107. So Moses threw down his 
staff and—behold!—it became a real snake. 108. Then he drew his hand 
“out of his collar’ and it was ‘shining’ white for all to see. 


Moses vs. Pharaoh’s Magicians 

109. The chiefs of Pharaoh’s people said, “He is indeed a skilled magician, 
110. who seeks to drive you from your land.” "So Pharaoh asked,” “What do 
you propose?” 111. They replied, “Let him and his brother wait and send 
mobilizers to all cities 112. to bring you every clever magician.” 113. The 
magicians came to Pharaoh, saying, “Shall we receive a ‘suitable’ reward if 
we prevail?” 114. He replied, “Yes, and you will certainly be among those 
closest to me.” 115. They asked, “O Moses! Will you cast, or shall we be 
the first to cast?” 116. Moses said, “You first.” So when they did, they 
deceived the eyes of the people, stunned them, and made a great display of 
magic. 117. Then We inspired Moses, “Throw down your staff,” and— 
behold!—it devoured the objects of their illusion! 118. So the truth 
prevailed and their illusions failed. 


Magicians Become Believers 

119. So Pharaoh and his people were defeated right there and put to shame. 
120. And the magicians fell down, prostrating. 121. They declared, “We 
‘now’ believe in the Lord of all worlds— 122. the Lord of Moses and 
Aaron.” 123. Pharaoh threatened, “How dare you believe in him before I 
give you permission? This must be a conspiracy you devised in the city to 
drive out its people, but soon you will see. 124. I will certainly cut off your 
hands and feet on opposite sides, then crucify you all.” 125. They 
responded, “Surely to our Lord we will ‘all’ return. 126. Your rage towards 
us is only because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came to 
us. Our Lord! Shower us with perseverance, and let us die while submitting 
"to You”.”[320] 


Pharaoh’s Persecution of the Israelites 
127. The chiefs of Pharaoh’s people protested, “Are you going to leave 
Moses and his people free to spread corruption in the land and abandon you 
and your gods?” He responded, “We will kill their sons and keep their 
women.!3%] We will completely dominate them.” 


Moses Reassures His People 
128. Moses reassured his people, “Seek Allah’s help and be patient. Indeed, 
the earth belongs to Allah ‘alone’. He grants it to whoever He chooses of 
His servants. The ultimate outcome belongs ‘only’ to the righteous.” 129. 
They complained, “We have always been oppressed—before and after you 
came to us ‘with the message’.” He replied, “Perhaps your Lord will destroy 
your enemy and make you successors in the land to see what you will do.” 


Egypt Plagued 
130. Indeed, We afflicted Pharaoh’s people with famine and shortage of 
crops so they might come back ‘to their senses’. 131. In times of prosperity, 
they said, “This is what we deserve,” but in adversity, they blamed it on 
Moses and those with him.'°22! Surely all is destined by Allah. Yet most of 
them did not know. 


Pharaoh’s People in Denial 
132. They said, “No matter what sign you may bring to deceive us, we will 
never believe in you.” 133. So We plagued them with floods, locusts, lice, 
frogs, and blood—all as clear signs, but they persisted in arrogance and 


were a wicked people. 134. When tormented, they pleaded, “O Moses! Pray 
to your Lord on our behalf, by virtue of the covenant He made with you. If 
you help remove this torment from us, we will certainly believe in you and 
let the Children of Israel go with you.” 135. But as soon as We removed the 
torment from them—auntil they met their inevitable fate'223!_they broke 
their promise. 136. So We inflicted punishment upon them, drowning them 
in the sea for denying Our signs and being heedless of them. 137. And ‘so’ 
We made the oppressed people successors of the eastern and western lands, 
which We had showered with blessings. "In this way’ the noble Word of 
your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel for what they had endured. 
And We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people constructed and what they 
established. 


The Israelites Demanding an Idol 

138. We brought the Children of Israel across the sea and they came upon a 
people devoted to idols. They demanded, “O Moses! Make for us a god like 
their gods.” He replied, “Indeed, you are a people acting ignorantly! 139. 
What they follow is certainly doomed to destruction and their deeds are in 
vain.” 140. He added, “Shall I seek for you a god other than Allah, while 
He has honoured you above the others?” 141. And ‘remember’ when We 
rescued you from the people of Pharaoh, who afflicted you with dreadful 
torment—killing your sons and keeping your women. That was a severe test 
from your Lord. 


Moses’ Appointment with Allah 
142. We appointed for Moses thirty nights then added another ten— 
completing his Lord’s term of forty nights. Moses commanded his brother 
Aaron, “Take my place among my people, do what is right, and do not 
follow the way of the corruptors.” 143. When Moses came at the appointed 
time and his Lord spoke to him, he asked, “My Lord! Reveal Yourself to me 
so I may see You.” Allah answered, “You cannot see Me! But look at the 
mountain. If it remains firm in its place, only then will you see Me.” When 
his Lord appeared to the mountain, He levelled it to dust and Moses 
collapsed unconscious. When he recovered, he cried, “Glory be to You! I 
turn to You in repentance and I am the first of the believers.” 144. Allah 
said, “O Moses! I have ‘already’ elevated you above all others by My 


messages and speech.'24! So hold firmly to what I have given you and be 
grateful.” 


The Tablets 

145. We wrote for him on the Tablets ‘the fundamentals’ of everything; 
commandments and explanations of all things. "We commanded,’ “Hold to 
this firmly and ask your people to take the best of it.'225! I will soon show 
all of" you the home of the rebellious.!225! 146. I will turn away from My 
signs those who act unjustly with arrogance in the land. And even if they 
were to see every sign, they still would not believe in them. If they see the 
Right Path, they will not take it. But if they see a crooked path, they will 
follow it. This is because they denied Our signs and were heedless of them. 
147. The deeds of those who deny Our signs and the meeting ‘with Allah’ 
in the Hereafter will be in vain. Will they be rewarded except for what they 
have done?” 


The Golden Calf 

148. In the absence of Moses, his people made from their "golden" jewellery 
an idol of a calf that made a lowing sound. Did they not see that it could 
neither speak to them nor guide them to the ‘Right’ Path? Still they took it 
as a god and were wrongdoers. 149. Later, when they were filled with 
remorse and realized they had gone astray, they cried, “If our Lord does not 
have mercy on us and forgive us, we will certainly be losers.” 150. Upon 
Moses’ return to his people, ‘totally’ furious and sorrowful, he said, “What 
an evil thing you committed in my absence! Did you want to hasten your 
Lord’s torment?” Then he threw down the Tablets and grabbed his brother 
by the hair, dragging him closer. Aaron pleaded, “O son of my mother! The 
people overpowered me and were about to kill me. So do not "humiliate me 
and’ make my enemies rejoice, nor count me among the wrongdoing 
people.” 


Moses Prays for Forgiveness 
151. Moses prayed, “My Lord! Forgive me and my brother! And admit us 
into Your mercy. You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.” 152. Those 
who worshipped the calf will certainly be afflicted with Allah’s wrath as 
well as disgrace in the life of this world. This is how We reward those who 
invent falsehood. 153. But those who commit evil, then repent and become 


‘true’ believers, your Lord will certainly be All-Forgiving, Most-Merciful. 
154. When Moses’ anger subsided, he took up the Tablets whose text 
contained guidance and mercy for those who stand in awe of their Lord. 


Begging for Allah’s Mercy 

155. Moses chose seventy men from among his people for Our appointment 
and, when they were seized by an earthquake, '222! he cried, “My Lord! Had 
You willed, You could have destroyed them long ago, and me as well. Will 
You destroy us for what the foolish among us have done? This is only a test 
from You—by which You allow whoever you will to stray and guide 
whoever You will. You are our Guardian. So forgive us and have mercy on 
us. You are the best forgiver. 156. Ordain for us what is good in this life and 
the next. Indeed, we have turned to You ‘in repentance’.” Allah replied, “I 
will inflict My torment on whoever I will. But My mercy encompasses 
everything. I will ordain mercy for those who shun evil, pay alms-tax, and 
believe in Our revelations. 


Prophet Muhammad in the Bible 

157. “They are’ the ones who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, 
whose description they find in their Torah and the Gospel.'228! He 
commands them to do good and forbids them from evil, permits for them 
what is lawful and forbids to them what is impure, and relieves them from 
their burdens and the shackles that bound them. "Only’ those who believe in 
him, honour and support him, and follow the light sent down to him will be 
successful.” 


Universality of Islam 
158. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O humanity! I am Allah’s Messenger to you all. To 
Him ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. There is no 
god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. He gives life and causes death.” So 
believe in Allah and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in 
Allah and His revelations. And follow him, so you may be ‘rightly’ guided. 


The Israelites Tested 
159. There are some among the people of Moses who guide with the truth 
and establish justice accordingly. 160. We divided them into twelve tribes— 
each as a community. And We revealed to Moses, when his people asked 
for water, “Strike the rock with your staff.” Then twelve springs gushed out. 


Each tribe knew its drinking place. We shaded them with clouds and sent 
down to them manna and quails,'222! "saying", “Eat from the good things We 
have provided for you.” They ‘certainly’ did not wrong Us, but wronged 
themselves. 161. And ‘remember’ when it was said to them, “Enter this city 
"of Jerusalem’ and eat from wherever you please. Say, ‘Absolve us,’ and 
enter the gate with humility. We will forgive your sins, ‘and’ We will 
multiply the reward for the good-doers.” 162. But the wrongdoers among 
them changed the words they were commanded to say. So We sent down a 
punishment from the heavens upon them for their wrongdoing. 


The Sabbath-Breakers 

163. Ask them "O Prophet’ about ‘the people of* the town which was by the 
sea, who broke the Sabbath. 222! During the Sabbath, ‘abundant’ fish would 
come to them clearly visible, but on other days the fish were never seen. In 
this way We tested them for their rebelliousness. 164. When some of ‘the 
righteous among’ them questioned ‘their fellow Sabbath-keepers’, “Why do 
you ‘bother to’ warn those 'Sabbath-breakers* who will either be destroyed 
or severely punished by Allah?” They replied, “Just to be free from your 
Lord’s blame, and so perhaps they may abstain.” 165. When they ignored 
the warning they were given, We rescued those who used to warn against 
evil and overtook the wrongdoers with a dreadful punishment for their 
rebelliousness. 166. But when they stubbornly persisted in violation, We 
said to them, “Be disgraced apes!”!33] 


The Israelites Tested Again 
167. And ‘remember, O Prophet,’ when your Lord declared that He would 
send against them others who would make them suffer terribly until the Day 
of Judgment. Indeed, your Lord is swift in punishment, but He is certainly 
All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 168. We dispersed them through the land in 
groups—some were righteous, others were less so. We tested them with 
prosperity and adversity, so perhaps they would return ‘to the Right Path’. 


Their Successors 
169. Then they were succeeded by other generations who inherited the 
Scripture. They indulged in unlawful gains, claiming, “We will be forgiven 
‘after all.” And if similar gain came their way, they would seize it. Was a 
covenant not taken from them in the Scripture that they would not say 


anything about Allah except the truth? And they were already well-versed 
in its teachings. But the ‘eternal’ Home of the Hereafter is far better for 
those mindful ‘of Allah’. Will you not then understand? 170. As for those 
who firmly abide by the Scripture and establish prayer—surely We never 
discount the reward of those acting righteously. 


Covenant with the Israelites 
171. And ‘remember’ when We raised the mountain over them as if it were 
a cloud and they thought it would fall on them.!232] "We said,” “Hold firmly 
to that ‘Scripture’ which We have given you and observe its teachings so 
perhaps you will become mindful ‘of Allah’.” 


Covenant with Humanity 

172. And ‘remember’ when your Lord brought forth from the loins of the 
children of Adam their descendants and had them testify regarding 
themselves. ‘Allah asked,’ “Am I not your Lord?” They replied, “Yes, You 
are! We testify.” "He cautioned,’ “Now you have no right to say on 
Judgment Day, ‘We were not aware of this.’ 173. Nor say, ‘It was our 
forefathers who had associated others "with Allah in worship’ and we, as 
their descendants, followed in their footsteps. Will you then destroy us for 
the falsehood they invented?’” 174. This is how We make our signs clear, 
so perhaps they will return "to the Right Path’. 


The Deviant Scholar!333!. 

175. And relate to them "O Prophet’ the story of the one to whom We gave 
Our signs, but he abandoned them, so Satan took hold of him, and he 
became a deviant. 176. If We had willed, We would have elevated him with 
Our signs, but he clung to this life—following his evil desires. His example 
is that of a dog: if you chase it away, it pants, and if you leave it, it “still” 
pants. This is the example of the people who deny Our signs.'224! So narrate 
"to them’ stories "of the past’, so perhaps they will reflect. 177. What an evil 
example of those who denied Our signs! They ‘only’ wronged their own 
souls. 


Guidance from Allah Only 
178. Whoever Allah guides is truly guided. And whoever He leaves to stray, 
they are the ‘true’ losers. 179. Indeed, We have destined many jinn and 
humans for Hell. They have hearts they do not understand with, eyes they 


do not see with, and ears they do not hear with. They are like cattle. In fact, 
they are even less guided! Such ‘people’ are ‘entirely’ heedless. 


Allah’s Beautiful Names 
180. Allah has the Most Beautiful Names. So call upon Him by them, and 
keep away from those who abuse His Names.'225! They will be punished for 
what they used to do. 


The Guided and the Misguided 
181. And among those We created is a group that guides with the truth and 
establishes justice accordingly. 182. As for those who deny Our signs, We 
will gradually draw them to destruction in ways they cannot comprehend. 
183. I ‘only’ delay their end for a while, but My planning is flawless. 


Rejecting the Prophet 
184. Have they not ever given it a thought? Their fellow man!'224! is not 
insane. He is only sent with a clear warning. 185. Have they ever reflected 
on the wonders of the heavens and the earth, and everything Allah has 
created, and that perhaps their end is near? So what message after this 
‘Quran’ would they believe in? 186. Whoever Allah allows to stray, none 
can guide, leaving them to wander blindly in their defiance. 


Time of the Final Hour 

187. They ask you "O Prophet’ regarding the Hour, “When will it be?” Say, 
“That knowledge is only with my Lord. He alone will reveal it when the 
time comes. It is too tremendous for the heavens and the earth and will only 
take you by surprise.” They ask you as if you had full knowledge of it. Say, 
“That knowledge is only with Allah, but most people do not know.” 188. 
Say, “I have no power to benefit or protect myself, except by the Will of 
Allah. If I had known the unknown, I would have benefited myself 
enormously, and no harm would have ever touched me. I am only a warner 
and deliverer of good news for those who believe.” 


Going Astray 
189. He is the One Who created you from a single soul, then from it made 
its spouse so he may find comfort in her. After he had been united with her, 
she carried a light burden that developed gradually. When it grew heavy, 
they prayed to Allah, their Lord, “If you grant us good offspring, we will 
certainly be grateful.” 190. But when He granted their descendants good 


offspring, they associated false gods in what He has given them. Exalted is 
Allah above what they associate ‘with Him’! 


Helpless Gods 

191. Do they associate ‘with Allah’ those ‘idols’ which cannot create 
anything, but are in fact created; 192. which cannot help them, or even help 
themselves? 193. And if you ‘idolaters’ call upon them for guidance, they 
cannot respond to you. It is all the same whether you call them or remain 
silent. 194. Those ‘idols’ you invoke besides Allah are created beings like 
yourselves. So call upon them and see if they will answer you, if your 
claims are true! 195. Do they have feet to walk with? Or hands to hold 
with? Or eyes to see with? Or ears to hear with? Say, "O Prophet,’ “Call 
upon your associate-gods and conspire against me without delay! 


Allah Is the Protector 
196. “Indeed, my Protector is Allah Who has revealed this Book. For He 
‘alone’ protects the righteous. 197. But those ‘false gods" you call besides 
Him can neither help you nor even themselves.” 198. If you ‘idolaters’ call 
them to guidance, they cannot hear. And you "O Prophet’ may see them 
facing towards you, but they cannot see. 


Grace and Tolerance 
199. Be gracious, enjoin what is right, and turn away from those who act 
ignorantly. 


Evil Impulses 
200. If you are tempted by Satan, then seek refuge with Allah. Surely He is 
All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 201. Indeed, when Satan whispers to those 
mindful "of Allah’, they remember ‘their Lord’ then they start to see ‘things’ 
clearly. 202. But the devils persistently plunge their human’ associates!222! 
deeper into wickedness, sparing no effort. 


Only a Messenger 
203. If you "O Prophet’ do not bring them a sign ‘which they demanded’, 
they ask, “Why do you not make it yourself?” Say, “I only follow what is 
revealed to me from my Lord. This ‘Quran’ is an insight from your Lord—a 
guide and a mercy for those who believe.” 


Honouring the Quran 


204. When the Quran is recited, listen to it attentively and be silent, so you 
may be shown mercy. 


Being in Awe of Allah 
205. Remember your Lord inwardly with humility and reverence and in a 
moderate tone of voice, both morning and evening. And do not be one of 
the heedless. 206. Surely those ‘angels’ nearest to your Lord are not too 
proud to worship Him. They glorify Him. And to Him they prostrate. 
kkk 


8. Spoils of War 
(Al-Anfal) 


This sûrah was revealed in Medina to explain how the spoils of war should 
be distributed following the believers’ victory over the Meccan pagans at 
Badr in 2 A.H./624 C.E. The sûrah urges the believers to be true to Allah 
and His Messenger, reminding them of how they were outnumbered but 
Allah sent down angels for their aid. It is made clear that although victory 
comes only from Allah, the believers should always be ready to defend 
themselves and be open for peace. The pagans are warned that their plots 
to hinder others from Allah’s Way and oppose the truth will only end in 
failure—a theme emphasized in both the previous and the following sirahs. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Distribution of Spoils of War!338! 
1. They ask you "O Prophet’ regarding the spoils of war. Say, “Their 
distribution is decided by Allah and His Messenger. So be mindful of Allah, 
settle your affairs, and obey Allah and His Messenger if you are ‘true’ 
believers.” 


Qualities of True Believers 
2. The ‘true’ believers are only those whose hearts tremble at the 
remembrance of Allah, whose faith increases when His revelations are 
recited to them, and who put their trust in their Lord. 3. "They are’ those 
who establish prayer and donate from what We have provided for them. 4. 
It is they who are the true believers. They will have elevated ranks, 
forgiveness, and an honourable provision from their Lord. 


Opposition to Fighting 
5. Similarly, when your Lord brought you "O Prophet’ out of your home for 
a just cause, a group of believers was totally against it. 6. They disputed 
with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as if they were being 
driven to death with their eyes wide open. 


Establishing the Truth 


7. "Remember, O believers,’ when Allah promised ‘to give’ you the upper 
hand over either target, you wished to capture the unarmed party.'222! But it 
was Allah’s Will to establish the truth by His Words and uproot the 
disbelievers; 8. to firmly establish the truth and wipe out falsehood—even 
to the dismay of the wicked. 


Divine Reinforcement 
9. ‘Remember’ when you cried out to your Lord for help, He answered, “I 
will reinforce you with a thousand angels—followed by many others.”!342! 
10. And Allah made this a sign of victory and reassurance to your hearts. 
Victory comes only from Allah. Surely Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 


Sense of Serenity 
11. "Remember’ when He caused drowsiness to overcome you, giving you 
serenity.'244! And He sent down rain from the sky to purify you, free you 
from Satan’s whispers, strengthen your hearts, and make ‘your’ steps firm. 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 

12. "Remember, O Prophet,’ when your Lord revealed to the angels, “I am 
with you. So make the believers stand firm. I will cast horror into the hearts 
of the disbelievers. So strike their necks and strike their fingertips.” 13. This 
is because they defied Allah and His Messenger. And whoever defies Allah 
and His Messenger, then ‘know that’ Allah is surely severe in punishment. 
14, That ‘worldly punishment’ is yours, so taste it! Then the disbelievers 
will suffer the torment of the Fire. 


Do Not Flee 
15. O believers! When you face the disbelievers in battle, never turn your 
backs to them. 16. And whoever does so on such an occasion—unless it is a 
manoeuvre or to join their own troops—will earn the displeasure of Allah, 
and their home will be Hell. What an evil destination! 


Victory from Allah 
17. It was not you ‘believers’ who killed them, but it was Allah Who did so. 
Nor was it you "O Prophet’ who threw ‘a handful of sand at the 
disbelievers’,'242! but it was Allah Who did so, rendering the believers a 
great favour. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 18. As such, Allah 
frustrates the evil plans of the disbelievers. 


Reasoning with Pagans 
19. If you “Meccans’ sought judgment, now it has come to you. And if you 
cease, it will be for your own good. But if you persist, We will persist. And 
your forces—no matter how numerous they might be—will not benefit you 
whatsoever. For Allah is certainly with the believers. 


Hearing and Obeying 

20. O believers! Obey Allah and His Messenger and do not turn away from 
him while you hear ‘his call’. 21. Do not be like those who say, “We hear,” 
but in fact they are not listening. 22. Indeed, the worst of all beings in the 
sight of Allah are the ‘wilfully’ deaf and dumb, who do not understand.!242! 
23. Had Allah known any goodness in them, He would have certainly made 
them hear. ‘But’ even if He had made them hear, they would have surely 
turned away heedlessly. 


Reminder to the Believers 
24. O believers! Respond to Allah and His Messenger when he calls you to 
that which gives you life. And know that Allah stands between a person and 
their heart, and that to Him you will all be gathered. 25. Beware of a trial 
that will not only affect the wrongdoers among you. And know that Allah is 
severe in punishment. 


Allah’s Help 
26. Remember when you had been vastly outnumbered and oppressed in the 
land,'3“! constantly in fear of attacks by your enemy, then He sheltered 
you, strengthened you with His help, and provided you with good things so 
perhaps you would be thankful. 


Warning to the Believers 
27. O believers! Do not betray Allah and the Messenger, nor betray your 
trusts knowingly. 28. And know that your wealth and your children are only 
a test and that with Allah is a great reward. 


Reward of the Believers 
29. O believers! If you are mindful of Allah, He will grant you a standard 
‘to distinguish between right and wrong’, absolve you of your sins, and 
forgive you. And Allah is the Lord of infinite bounty. 


Pagan Conspiracy 


30. And ‘remember, O Prophet,’ when the disbelievers conspired to capture, 
kill, or exile you. They planned, but Allah also planned. And Allah is the 
best of planners. 


Pagan Challenge 
31. Whenever Our revelations are recited to them, they challenge ‘you’, 
“We have already heard ‘the recitation’. If we wanted, we could have easily 
produced something similar. This “Quran’ is nothing but ancient fables!” 


Pagan Denial 
32. And ‘remember’ when they prayed, “O Allah! If this is indeed the truth 
from You, then rain down stones upon us from the sky or overcome us with 
a painful punishment.” 33. But Allah would never punish them while you 
"O Prophet’ were in their midst. Nor would He ever punish them if they 
prayed for forgiveness. 


Punishment Deserved 
34. And why should Allah not punish them while they hinder pilgrims from 
the Sacred Mosque, claiming to be its rightful guardians? None has the right 
to guardianship except those mindful ‘of Allah’, but most pagans do not 
know. 35. Their prayer at the Sacred House was nothing but whistling and 
clapping. So taste the punishment for your disbelief. 


Pagans’ Wasted Efforts 
36. Surely the disbelievers spend their wealth to hinder others from the Path 
of Allah. They will continue to spend to the point of regret. Then they will 
be defeated and the disbelievers will be driven into Hell, 37. so Allah may 
separate the evil from the good. He will pile up the evil ones all together 
and then cast them into Hell. They are the ‘true’ losers. 


Peace Offer 
38. Tell the disbelievers that if they desist, their past will be forgiven. But if 
they persist, then they have an example in those destroyed before them. 39. 
Fight against them until there is no more persecution—and ‘your’ devotion 
will be entirely to Allah. But if they desist, then surely Allah is All-Seeing 
of what they do. 40. And if they do not comply, then know that Allah is 
your Protector. What an excellent Protector, and what an excellent Helper! 


Distribution of Spoils of War 


41. Know that whatever spoils you take, one-fifth is for Allah and the 
Messenger, his close relatives, orphans, the poor, and ‘needy’ travellers, if 
you ‘truly’ believe in Allah and what We revealed to Our servant on that 
decisive day when the two armies met ‘at Badr’. And Allah is Most Capable 
of everything. 42. "Remember’ when you were on the near side of the 
valley, your enemy on the far side, and the caravan was below you. Even if 
the two armies had made an appointment ‘to meet’, both would have 
certainly missed it.'°45! Still it transpired so Allah may establish what He 
had destined—that those who were to perish and those who were to survive 
might do so after the truth had been made clear to both. Surely Allah is All- 
Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Vision of Enemy Force 

43. "Remember, O Prophet,’ when Allah showed them in your dream as few 
in number. Had He shown them to you as many, you ‘believers’ would have 
certainly faltered and disputed in the matter. But Allah spared you ‘from 
that’. Surely He knows best what is "hidden’ in the heart. 44. Then when 
your armies met, Allah made them appear as few in your eyes, and made 
you appear as few in theirs, so Allah may establish what He had destined. 
And to Allah “all” matters will be returned ‘for judgment’. 


Word of Advice 

45. O believers! When you face an enemy, stand firm and remember Allah 
often so you may triumph. 46. Obey Allah and His Messenger and do not 
dispute with one another, or you would be discouraged and weakened. 
Persevere! Surely Allah is with those who persevere. 47. Do not be like 
those ‘pagans’ who left their homes arrogantly, only to be seen by people 
and to hinder others from Allah’s Path. And Allah is Fully Aware of what 
they do. 


Satan Tempts the Meccan Pagans 
48. And ‘remember’ when Satan made their ‘evil’ deeds appealing to them, 
and said, “No one can overcome you today. I am surely by your side.” But 
when the two forces faced off, he cowered and said, “I have absolutely 
nothing to do with you. I certainly see what you do not see. I truly fear 
Allah, for Allah is severe in punishment.” 


Trust in Allah 


49. 'Remember’ when the hypocrites and those with sickness in their hearts 
said, “These ‘believers’ are deluded by their faith.” But whoever puts their 
trust in Allah, surely Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 


Evil Ending 
50. If only you could see when the angels take the souls of the disbelievers, 
beating their faces and backs, ‘saying,’ “Taste the torment of burning! 51. 
This is ‘the reward’ for what your hands have done. And Allah is never 
unjust to "His" creation.” 


Fate of the Wicked 

52. Their fate is that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them—they 
all disbelieved in Allah’s signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. Indeed, 
Allah is All-Powerful, severe in punishment. 53. This is because Allah 
would never discontinue His favour to a people until they discontinue their 
faith. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 54. That was the case with 
Pharaoh’s people and those before them—they all rejected the signs of their 
Lord, so We destroyed them for their sins and drowned Pharaoh’s people. 
They were all wrongdoers. 


Those Who Violate Peace Treaties 
55. Indeed, the worst of all beings in the sight of Allah are those who persist 
in disbelief, never to have faith— 56. ‘namely’ those with whom you "O 
Prophet’ have entered into treaties, but they violate them every time, not 
fearing the consequences. 57. If you ever encounter them in battle, make a 
fearsome example of them, so perhaps those who would follow them may 
be deterred. 


No Betrayal in Treaties 
58. And if you "O Prophet’ see signs of betrayal by a people, respond by 
openly terminating your treaty with them. Surely Allah does not like those 
who betray. 


Military Deterrence 
59. Do not let those disbelievers'*“®! think they are not within reach. They 
will have no escape. 60. Prepare against them what you ‘believers’ can of 
‘military’ power and cavalry to deter Allah’s enemies and your enemies as 
well as other enemies unknown to you but known to Allah. Whatever you 


spend in the cause of Allah will be paid to you in full and you will not be 
wronged. 


Advice to the Prophet: Opt for Peace 

61. If the enemy is inclined towards peace, make peace with them. And put 
your trust in Allah. Indeed, He ‘alone’ is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 62. 
But if their intention is only to deceive you, then Allah is certainly 
sufficient for you. He is the One Who has supported you with His help and 
with the believers. 63. He brought their hearts together. Had you spent all 
the riches in the earth, you could not have united their hearts. But Allah has 
united them. Indeed, He is Almighty, All-Wise. 64. O Prophet! Allah is 
sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you. 


Readiness to Fight 

65. O Prophet! Motivate the believers to fight. If there are twenty steadfast 
among you, they will overcome two hundred. And if there are one hundred 
of you, they will overcome one thousand of the disbelievers, for they are a 
people who do not comprehend. 66. Now Allah has lightened your burden, 
for He knows that there is weakness in you. So if there are a hundred 
steadfast among you, they will overcome two hundred. And if there be one 
thousand, they will overcome two thousand, by Allah’s Will. And Allah is 
with the steadfast. 


Decision on Captives 

67. It is not fit for a prophet that he should take captives until he has 
thoroughly subdued the land. You ‘believers’ settled with the fleeting gains 
of this world,'2“2! while Allah’s aim "for you" is the Hereafter. Allah is 
Almighty, All-Wise. 68. Had it not been for a prior decree from Allah,!248! 
you would have certainly been disciplined with a tremendous punishment 
for whatever ‘ransom’ you have taken. 69. Now enjoy what you have taken, 
for it is lawful and good. And be mindful of Allah. Surely Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Ransomed Captives 
70. O Prophet! Tell the captives in your custody, “If Allah finds goodness in 
your hearts, He will give you better than what has been taken from you, and 
forgive you. For Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” 71. But if their 
intention is only to betray you "O Prophet’, they sought to betray Allah 


before. But He gave you power over them. And Allah is All-Knowing, All- 
Wise. 


Guardianship Among Believers 

72. Those who believed, emigrated, and strived with their wealth and lives 
in the cause of Allah, as well as those who gave them shelter and help— 
they are truly guardians of one another. As for those who believed but did 
not emigrate, you have no obligations to them until they emigrate. But if 
they seek your help ‘against persecution’ in faith, it is your obligation to 
help them, except against people bound with you in a treaty. Allah is All- 
Seeing of what you do. 


Guardianship Among Disbelievers 
73. As for the disbelievers, they are guardians of one another. And unless 
you ‘believers’ act likewise, there will be great oppression and corruption in 
the land. 


True Believers 
74. Those who believed, migrated, and struggled in the cause of Allah, and 
those who gave ‘them’ shelter and help, they are the true believers. They 
will have forgiveness and an honourable provision. 


Relatives Inherit One Another 
75. And those who later believed, migrated, and struggled alongside you, 
they are also with you. But only blood relatives are now entitled to inherit 
from one another, as ordained by Allah. Surely Allah has ‘full’ knowledge 
of everything.!349! 
kkk 


9. Repentance 
(At-Tawbah) 


This sûrah, which is perceived as a continuation of the previous sûrah, 
begins by openly terminating the peace treaties constantly violated by, 
pagans. The believers are urged to march forth with the Prophet ( .{z-[5) 
for the Battle of Tabûk in the summer of 9 A.H./631 C.E. HypocfitéS“are 
exposed and their false excuses are refuted. Muslims are reminded of how 
Allah turned the believers’ initial defeat into sweeping pactory at the Battle 
of Hunain and how Allah saved His Messenger ( .{z-[;) from the pagans 
during his migration to Medina. Allah’s eee” ‘repentance is echoed 
throughout the surah, hence its title. 


Declaration to the Polytheists!322! 

1. ‘This is’ a discharge from all obligations, by Allah and His Messenger, to 
the polytheists you ‘believers’ have entered into treaties with: 2. “You 
"polytheists’ may travel freely through the land for four months, but know 
that you will have no escape from Allah, and that Allah will disgrace the 
disbelievers.” 3. A declaration from Allah and His Messenger ‘is made’ to 
all people on the day of the greater pilgrimage!!! that Allah and His 
Messenger are free of the polytheists. So if you ‘pagans’ repent, it will be 
better for you. But if you turn away, then know that you will have no escape 
from Allah. And give good news "O Prophet’ to the disbelievers of a painful 
punishment. 


Exception to the Declaration 
4. As for the polytheists who have honoured every term of their treaty with 
you and have not supported an enemy against you, honour your treaty with 
them until the end of its term. Surely Allah loves those who are mindful ‘of 
Him’. 
After the Grace Period 

5. But once the Sacred Months have passed, kill the polytheists ‘who 
violated their treaties’ wherever you find them,!254! capture them, besiege 
them, and lie in wait for them on every way. But if they repent, perform 
prayers, and pay alms-tax, then set them free. Indeed, Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Pagans Seeking Protection 
6. And if anyone from the polytheists asks for your protection "O Prophet’, 
grant it to them so they may hear the Word of Allah, then escort them to a 
place of safety, for they are a people who have no knowledge. 


Treacherous Polytheists 

7. How can such polytheists have a treaty with Allah and His Messenger, 
except those you have made a treaty with at the Sacred Mosque?!2=2! So, as 
long as they are true to you, be true to them. Indeed Allah loves those who 
are mindful ‘of Him’. 8. How ‘can they have a treaty"? If they were to have 
the upper hand over you, they would have no respect for kinship or treaty. 
They only flatter you with their tongues, but their hearts are in denial, and 
most of them are rebellious. 


Arab Pagans 

9. They chose a fleeting gain over Allah’s revelations, hindering ‘others’ 
from His Way. Evil indeed is what they have done! 10. They do not honour 
the bonds of kinship or treaties with the believers. It is they who are the 
transgressors. 11. But if they repent, perform prayer, and pay alms-tax, then 
they are your brothers in faith. This is how We make the revelations clear 
for people of knowledge. 12. But if they break their oaths after making a 
pledge and attack your faith, then fight the champions of disbelief—who 
never honour their oaths—so perhaps they will desist. 


Order to Fight 
13. Will you not fight those who have broken their oaths, conspired to expel 
the Messenger ‘from Mecca’, and attacked you first? Do you fear them? 
Allah is more deserving of your fear, if you are ‘true’ believers. 14. "So" 
fight them and Allah will punish them at your hands, put them to shame, 
help you overcome them, and soothe the hearts of the believers— 15. 
removing rage from their hearts. And Allah pardons whoever He wills. For 
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 
Wisdom Behind Fighting 

16. Do you ‘believers’ think that you will be left without Allah proving who 
among you ‘truly’ struggles "in His cause" and never takes trusted allies 
other than Allah, His Messenger, or the believers? And Allah is All-Aware 
of what you do. 


Maintenance of Mosques 
17. It is not for the polytheists to maintain the mosques of Allah while they 
openly profess disbelief. Their deeds are void, and they will be in the Fire 
forever. 18. The mosques of Allah should only be maintained by those who 
believe in Allah and the Last Day, establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and fear 
none but Allah. It is right to hope that they will be among the ‘truly’ guided. 


Not Equal 
19. Do you ‘pagans’ consider providing the pilgrims with water and 
maintaining the Sacred Mosque as equal to believing in Allah and the Last 
Day and struggling in the cause of Allah? They are not equal in Allah’s 
sight. And Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people. 


Reward of the Believers 
20. Those who have believed, emigrated, and strived in the cause of Allah 
with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank in the sight of Allah. It is 
they who will triumph. 21. Their Lord gives them good news of His mercy, 
pleasure, and Gardens with everlasting bliss, 22. to stay there for ever and 
ever. Surely with Allah is a great reward. 


Warning to the Believers 

23. O believers! Do not take your parents and siblings as trusted allies if 
they choose disbelief over belief. And whoever of you does so, they are the 
“true” wrongdoers. 24. Say, "O Prophet,’ “If your parents and children and 
siblings and spouses and extended family and the wealth you have acquired 
and the trade you fear will decline and the homes you cherish—‘if all these’ 
are more beloved to you than Allah and His Messenger and struggling in 
His Way, then wait until Allah brings about His Will. Allah does not guide 
the rebellious people.” 


Victory Is from Allah Alone 
25. Indeed Allah has given you ‘believers’ victory on many battlefields, 
even at the Battle of Hunain'254] when you took pride in your great 
numbers, but they proved of no advantage to you. The earth, despite its 
vastness, seemed to close in on you, then you turned back in retreat. 26. 
Then Allah sent down His reassurance] upon His Messenger and the 
believers, and sent down forces!255! you could not see, and punished those 
who disbelieved. Such was the reward of the disbelievers. 27. Then 


afterwards Allah will turn in grace to whoever He wills.'252! And Allah is 
All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


No More Idolatry at the Ka’bah 
28. O believers! Indeed, the polytheists are "spiritually" impure,!238] so they 
should not approach the Sacred Mosque after this year.'°°2! If you fear 


poverty, Allah will enrich you out of His bounty, if He wills. Surely, Allah 
is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Command to Fight 
29. Fight those who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day, nor comply 
with what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, nor embrace the 
religion of truth from among those who were given the Scripture,!2®! until 
they pay the tax,!2©!! willingly submitting, fully humbled. 


Blind Following 

30. The Jews say, “Ezra is the son of Allah,” while the Christians say, “The 
Messiah is the son of Allah.” Such are their baseless assertions, only 
parroting the words of earlier disbelievers. May Allah condemn them! How 
can they be deluded ‘from the truth’? 31. They have taken their rabbis and 
monks as well as the Messiah, son of Mary, as lords besides Allah,'3®2! even 
though they were commanded to worship none but One God. There is no 
god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. Glorified is He above what they 
associate ‘with Him"! 


The True Faith 
32. They wish to extinguish Allah’s light'2®3! with their mouths, but Allah 
will only allow His light to be perfected, even to the dismay of the 
disbelievers. 33. He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with ‘true’ 
guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others, even to 
the dismay of the polytheists. 


Unlawful Gains 
34. O believers! Indeed, many rabbis and monks consume people’s wealth 
wrongfully and hinder ‘others’ from the Way of Allah. Give good news of a 
painful torment to those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in 
Allah’s cause. 35. The Day ‘will come’ when their treasure will be heated 
up in the Fire of Hell, and their foreheads, sides, and backs branded with it. 


"It will be said to them,’ “This is the treasure you hoarded for yourselves. 
Now taste what you hoarded!” 


Honouring the Sacred Months 
36. Indeed, the number of months ordained by Allah is twelve—in Allah’s 
Record!3! since the day He created the heavens and the earth—of which 
four are sacred. That is the Right Way. So do not wrong one another during 
these months. And together fight the polytheists as they fight against you 
together. And know that Allah is with those mindful ‘of Him’. 37. 
Reallocating the sanctity of ‘these’ months!2®5! is an increase in disbelief, by 
which the disbelievers are led ‘far’ astray. They adjust the sanctity one year 
and uphold it in another, only to maintain the number of months sanctified 
by Allah, violating the very months Allah has made sacred. Their evil deeds 
have been made appealing to them. And Allah does not guide the 
disbelieving people. 
Clinging to This Life 

38. O believers! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to 
march forth in the cause of Allah, you cling firmly to ‘your’ land?!2®2! Do 
you prefer the life of this world over the Hereafter? The enjoyment of this 
worldly life is insignificant compared to that of the Hereafter. 39. If you do 
not march forth, He will afflict you with a painful torment and replace you 
with other people. You are not harming Him in the least. And Allah is Most 
Capable of everything. 


Supporting the Prophet 

40. ‘It does not matter’ if you "believers* do not support him, for Allah did 
in fact support him when the disbelievers drove him out ‘of Mecca’ and he 
was only one of two. While they both were in the cave, he reassured his 
companion, !267] “Do not worry; Allah is certainly with us.” So Allah sent 
down His serenity upon the Prophet, supported him with forces you 
believers’ did not see, and made the word of the disbelievers lowest, while 
the Word of Allah is supreme. And Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 41. "O 
believers!” March forth whether it is easy or difficult for you, and strive 
with your wealth and your lives in the cause of Allah. That is best for you, 
if only you knew. 


False Excuse 1) Inability 


42. Had the gain been within reach and the journey shorter, they would have 
followed you, but the distance seemed too long for them. And they will 
swear by Allah, “Had we been able, we would have certainly joined you.” 
They are ruining themselves. And Allah knows that they are surely lying. 
43. May Allah pardon you "O Prophet"! Why did you give them permission 
"to stay behind’ before those who told the truth were distinguished from 
those who were lying? 
Exemption from Fighting 

44. Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day do not ask for exemption 
from striving with their wealth and their lives. And Allah has perfect 
knowledge of those who are mindful "of Him’. 45. No one would ask for 
exemption except those who have no faith in Allah or the Last Day, and 
whose hearts are in doubt, so they are torn by their doubts. 


The Trouble-Makers 

46. Had they ‘really’ intended to march forth, they would have made 
preparations for it. But Allah disliked that they should go, so He let them 
lag behind, and it was said ‘to them’, “Stay with those ‘helpless’ who 
remain behind.” 47. Had they gone forth with you ‘believers’, they would 
have been nothing but trouble for you, and would have scrambled around, 
seeking to spread discord in your midst. And some of you would have 
eagerly listened to them. And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of the 
wrongdoers. 48. They had already sought to spread discord before!3®8! and 
devised every ‘possible’ plot against you "O Prophet’, until the truth came 
and Allah’s Will prevailed—much to their dismay. 


False Excuse 2) Temptation 
49. There are some of them who say, “Exempt me and do not expose me to 
temptation.”!362! They have already fallen into temptation. And Hell will 
surely engulf the disbelievers. 


Those Who Stayed Behind 
50. If a blessing befalls you "O Prophet’, they grieve, but if a disaster befalls 
you, they say, “We took our precaution in advance,” and turn away, 
rejoicing. 51. Say, “Nothing will ever befall us except what Allah has 
destined for us. He is our Protector.” So in Allah let the believers put their 
trust. 52. Say, “Are you awaiting anything to befall us except one of the two 


best things: ‘victory or martyrdom’? But We are awaiting Allah to afflict 
you with torment either from Him or at our hands. So keep waiting! We too 
are waiting with you.” 


Unaccepted Contributions 

53. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Whether you’ donate willingly or unwillingly, it will 
never be accepted from you, for you have been a rebellious people.” 54. 
And what prevented their donations from being accepted is that they have 
lost faith in Allah and His Messenger, they never come to prayer except 
half-heartedly, and they never donate except resentfully. 55. So let neither 
their wealth nor children impress you "O Prophet’. Allah only intends to 
torment them through these things in this worldly life, then their souls will 
depart while they are disbelievers. 


False Oaths 
56. They swear by Allah that they are part of you, but they are not. They 
only say so out of fear. 57. If only they could find a refuge, or a cave, or any 
hiding-place, they would rush headlong towards it. 


Discontent with Charity 
58. There are some of them who are critical of your distribution of alms "O 
Prophet’. If they are given some of it they are pleased, but if not they are 
enraged. 59. If only they had been content with what Allah and His 
Messenger had given them and said, “Allah is sufficient for us! Allah will 
grant us out of His bounty, and so will His Messenger. To Allah ‘alone’ we 
turn with hope.” 


Alms-Tax Recipients 
60. Alms-tax is only for the poor and the needy, for those employed to 
administer it, for those whose hearts are attracted ‘to the faith’, for "freeing' 
slaves, for those in debt, for Allah’s cause, and for ‘needy’ travellers. "This 
is’ an obligation from Allah. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Criticizing the Prophet 
61. And there are others who hurt the Prophet by saying, “He listens to 
anyone.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “He listens to what is best for you. He believes 
in Allah, has faith in the believers, and is a mercy for those who believe 
among you.” Those who hurt Allah’s Messenger will suffer a painful 
punishment. 


The Disgrace 
62. They swear by Allah to you ‘believers’ in order to please you, while it is 
the pleasure of Allah and His Messenger they should seek, if they are ‘true’ 
believers. 63. Do they not know that whoever opposes Allah and His 
Messenger will be in the Fire of Hell forever? That is the ultimate disgrace. 


Blasphemy Exposed 

64. The hypocrites fear that a sûrah should be revealed about them, 
exposing what is in their hearts. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Keep mocking! Allah 
will definitely bring to light what you fear.” 65. If you question them, they 
will certainly say, “We were only talking idly and joking around.” Say, 
“Was it Allah, His revelations, and His Messenger that you ridiculed?” 66. 
Make no excuses! You have lost faith after your belief. If We pardon a 
group of you,'222! We will punish others for their wickedness. 


Punishment of the Hypocrites 

67. The hypocrites, both men and women, are all alike: they encourage 
what is evil, forbid what is good, and withhold ‘what is in’ their hands. 
They neglected Allah, so He neglected them. Surely the hypocrites are the 
rebellious. 68. Allah has promised the hypocrites, both men and women, 
and the disbelievers an everlasting stay in the Fire of Hell—it is sufficient 
for them. Allah has condemned them, and they will suffer a never-ending 
punishment. 


Fate of the Disbelievers 

69. “You hypocrites are’ like those ‘disbelievers’ before you. They were far 
Superior to you in might and more abundant in wealth and children. They 
enjoyed their share in this life. You have enjoyed your share, just as they 
did. And you have engaged in idle talk, just as they did. Their deeds have 
become void in this world and the Hereafter. And it is they who are the 
‘true’ losers. 70. Have they not received the stories of those ‘destroyed’ 
before them: the people of Noah, ’Ad, and Thamiid, the people of Abraham, 
the residents of Midian, and the overturned cities ‘of Lot?! Their 
messengers came to them with clear proofs. Allah would have never 
wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves. 


Reward of the Believers 


71. The believers, both men and women, are guardians of one another. They 
encourage good and forbid evil, establish prayer and pay alms-tax, and obey 
Allah and His Messenger. It is they who will be shown Allah’s mercy. 
Surely Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 72. Allah has promised the believers, 
both men and women, Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there 
forever, and splendid homes in the Gardens of Eternity, and—above all— 
the pleasure of Allah. That is ‘truly’ the ultimate triumph. 


Returning Favour with Ingratitude 

73. O Prophet! Struggle against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be 
firm with them. Hell will be their home. What an evil destination! 74. They 
swear by Allah that they never said anything blasphemous’, while they did 
in fact utter a blasphemy, lost faith after accepting Islam, and plotted what 
they could not carry out.'222! It is only through resentment that they pay 
Allah and His Messenger back for enriching them out of His bounty! If they 
repent, it will be better for them. But if they turn away, Allah will torment 
them with a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter, and they 
will have no one on earth to protect or help them. 


The Ungrateful 

75. And there are some who had made a vow to Allah: “If He gives us from 
His bounty, we will surely spend in charity and be of the righteous.” 76. But 
when He gave them out of His bounty, they withheld it and turned away 
indifferently. 77. So He caused hypocrisy to plague their hearts until the 
Day they will meet Him, for breaking their promise to Allah and for their 
lies. 78. Do they not know that Allah ‘fully* knows their "evil" thoughts and 
secret talks, and that Allah is the Knower of all unseen? 


Donations Criticized!323! 

79. "There are’ those who slander "some of' the believers for donating 
liberally and mock others for giving only the little they can afford. Allah 
will throw their mockery back at them, and they will suffer a painful 
punishment. 80. "It does not matter’ whether you "O Prophet’ pray for them 
to be forgiven or not. Even if you pray for their forgiveness seventy times, 
Allah will never forgive them. That is because they have lost faith in Allah 
and His Messenger. And Allah does not guide the rebellious people. 


False Excuse 3) Heat 


81. Those ‘hypocrites’ who remained behind rejoiced for doing so in 
defiance of the Messenger of Allah and hated "the prospect of" striving with 
their wealth and their lives in the cause of Allah. They said ‘to one another’, 
“Do not march forth in the heat.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “The Fire of Hell is far 
hotter!” If only they could comprehend! 82. So let them laugh a little—they 
will weep much as a reward for what they have committed. 


Instructions to the Prophet 

83. If Allah returns you "O Prophet’ to a group of them and they ask to go 
forth with you, say, “You will not ever go forth or fight an enemy along 
with me. You preferred to stay behind the first time, so stay with those 
helpless’ who remain behind.” 84. And do not ever offer ‘funeral” prayers 
for any of their dead, nor stand by their grave ‘at burial’, for they have lost 
faith in Allah and His Messenger and died rebellious. 85. And let neither 
their wealth nor children impress you "O Prophet’. Allah only intends to 
torment them through these things in this world, and ‘then’ their souls will 
depart while they are disbelievers. 


The Unfaithful 
86. Whenever a sûrah is revealed stating, “Believe in Allah and struggle 
along with His Messenger,” the rich among them would ask to be exempt, 
saying, “Leave us with those who remain behind.” 87. They preferred to 
stay behind with the helpless, and their hearts have been sealed so they do 
not comprehend. 


The Faithful 
88. But the Messenger and the believers with him strived with their wealth 
and their lives. They will have all the best, and it is they who will be 
successful. 89. Allah has prepared for them Gardens under which rivers 
flow, to stay there forever. That is the ultimate triumph. 


Unfaithful Nomads 
90. Some nomadic Arabs ‘also’ came with excuses, seeking exemption. 
And those who were untrue to Allah and His Messenger remained behind 
“with no excuse’. The unfaithful among them will be afflicted with a painful 
punishment. 


Valid Excuses 


91. There is no blame on the weak, the sick, or those lacking the means ‘if 
they stay behind’, as long as they are true to Allah and His Messenger. 
There is no blame on the good-doers. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 92. Nor ‘is there any blame on’ those who came to you "O 
Prophet" for mounts, then when you said, “I can find no mounts for you,” 
they left with eyes overflowing with tears out of grief that they had nothing 
to contribute. 


Invalid Excuses 

93. Blame is only on those who seek exemption from you although they 
have the means. They preferred to stay behind with the helpless, and Allah 
has sealed their hearts so they do not realize "the consequences’. 94. They 
will make excuses to you "believers’ when you return to them. Say, “Make 
no excuses, ‘for’ we will not believe you. Allah has already informed us 
about your ‘true’ state ‘of faith’. Your ‘future’ deeds will be observed by 
Allah and His Messenger as well. And you will be returned to the Knower 
of the seen and unseen, then He will inform you of what you used to do.” 
95. When you return, they will swear to you by Allah so that you may leave 
them alone. So leave them alone—they are truly evil. Hell will be their 
home as a reward for what they have committed. 96. They will swear to you 
in order to please you. And even if you are pleased with them, Allah will 
never be pleased with the rebellious people. 


Unfaithful Nomads 
97. The nomadic Arabs ‘around Medina’ are far worse in disbelief and 
hypocrisy, and less likely to know the laws revealed by Allah to His 
Messenger. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 98. And among the 
nomads are those who consider what they donate to be a loss and await 
your misfortune. May ill-fortune befall them! And Allah is All-Hearing, 
All-Knowing. 


Faithful Nomads 
99. However, among the nomadic Arabs are those who believe in Allah and 
the Last Day, and consider what they donate as a means of coming closer to 
Allah and ‘receiving’ the prayers of the Messenger. It will certainly bring 
them closer. Allah will admit them into His mercy. Surely Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


The Foremost 
100. As for the foremost—the first of the Emigrants!2/4] and the 
Helpers!225!and those who follow them in goodness, Allah is pleased 
with them and they are pleased with Him. And He has prepared for them 
Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. That is the 
ultimate triumph. 


Master Hypocrites 
101. Some of the nomads around you ‘believers’ are hypocrites, as are some 
of the people of Medina. They have mastered hypocrisy. They are not 
known to you "O Prophet’; they are known to Us. We will punish them 
twice "in this world’,'°£! then they will be brought back "to their Lord” for a 
tremendous punishment. 


Those Who Are Forgiven 

102. Some others have confessed their wrongdoing: they have mixed 
goodness with evil.!Z2! It is right to hope that Allah will turn to them in 
mercy. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 103. Take from their 
wealth "O Prophet’ charity to purify and bless them, and pray for them— 
surely your prayer is a source of comfort for them. And Allah is All- 
Hearing, All-Knowing. 104. Do they not know that Allah alone accepts the 
repentance of His servants and receives ‘their’ charity, and that Allah alone 
is the Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful? 


A Second Chance 
105. Tell ‘them, O Prophet’, “Do as you will. Your deeds will be observed 
by Allah, His Messenger, and the believers. And you will be returned to the 
Knower of the seen and unseen, then He will inform you of what you used 
to do.” 


The Three Who Remained Behind!328! 
106. And some others are left for Allah’s decision, either to punish them or 
turn to them in mercy. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


The Mosque of Harm 
107. There are also those ‘hypocrites’ who set up a mosque ‘only’ to cause 
harm, promote disbelief, divide the believers, and as a base for those who 
had previously fought against Allah and His Messenger.'222!. They will 
definitely swear, “We intended nothing but good,” but Allah bears witness 


that they are surely liars. 108. Do not "O Prophet’ ever pray in it. Certainly, 
a mosque founded on righteousness from the first day is more worthy of 
your prayers. In it are men who love to be purified.'282! And Allah loves 
those who purify themselves. 109. Which is better: those who laid the 
foundation of their building on the fear and pleasure of Allah, or those who 
did so on the edge of a crumbling cliff that tumbled down with them into 
the Fire of Hell? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people. 110. 
The building which they erected will never cease to fuel hypocrisy in their 
hearts until their hearts are torn apart. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


The Finest Bargain 

111. Allah has indeed purchased from the believers their lives and wealth in 
exchange for Paradise. They fight in the cause of Allah and kill or are 
killed. This is a true promise binding on Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and 
the Quran. And whose promise is truer than Allah’s? So rejoice in the 
exchange you have made with Him. That is ‘truly’ the ultimate triumph. 
112. ‘It is the believers’ who repent, who are devoted to worship, who 
praise ‘their Lord’, who fast, who bow down and prostrate themselves, who 
encourage good and forbid evil, and who observe the limits set by Allah. 
And give good news to the believers. 


Praying for the Polytheists 
113. It is not ‘proper’ for the Prophet and the believers to seek forgiveness 
for the polytheists, even if they were close relatives, after it has become 
clear to the believers that they are bound for the Hellfire. 114. As for 
Abraham’s prayer for his father’s forgiveness, it was only in fulfilment of a 
promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to Abraham that his 
father was an enemy of Allah, he broke ties with him.'381] Abraham was 
truly tender-hearted, forbearing. 115. Allah would never consider a people 
deviant after He has guided them, until He makes clear to them what they 
must avoid. Surely Allah has ‘full’ knowledge of everything. 
Allah’s Might 

116. Indeed, to Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the 
earth. He gives life and causes death. And besides Allah you have no 
guardian or helper. 


Allah’s Mercy 


117. Allah has certainly turned in mercy to the Prophet'282! as well as the 
Emigrants and the Helpers who stood by him in the time of hardship, after 
the hearts of a group of them had almost faltered. He then accepted their 
repentance. Surely He is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to them. 


The Three!3831 

118. And ‘Allah has also turned in mercy to’ the three who had remained 
behind, ‘whose guilt distressed them’ until the earth, despite its vastness, 
seemed to close in on them, and their souls were torn in anguish. They 
knew there was no refuge from Allah except in Him. Then He turned to 
them in mercy so that they might repent. Surely Allah ‘alone’ is the 
Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful. 119. O believers! Be mindful of 
Allah and be with the truthful. 


A Fine Reward 

120. It was not ‘proper’ for the people of Medina and the nomadic Arabs 
around them to avoid marching with the Messenger of Allah or to prefer 
their own lives above his. That is because whenever they suffer from thirst, 
fatigue, or hunger in the cause of Allah; or tread on a territory, unnerving 
the disbelievers; or inflict any loss on an enemy—it is written to their credit 
as a good deed. Surely Allah never discounts the reward of the good-doers. 
121. And whenever they make a donation, small or large, or cross a valley 
"in Allah’s cause’"—it is written to their credit, so that Allah may grant them 
the best reward for what they used to do. 


Gaining Knowledge 
122. ‘However,’ it is not necessary for the believers to march forth all at 
once. Only a party from each group should march forth, leaving the rest to 
gain religious knowledge then enlighten their people when they return to 
them, so that they ‘too’ may beware "of evil’. 


Firmness with the Disbelievers!284! 
123. O believers! Fight the disbelievers around you and let them find 
firmness in you. And know that Allah is with those mindful "of Him’. 


Hypocrites Reacting to Revelation 
124. Whenever a surah is revealed, some of them ask "mockingly’, “Which 
of you has this increased in faith?” As for the believers, it has increased 
them in faith and they rejoice. 125. But as for those with sickness in their 


hearts,!285! it has increased them only in wickedness upon their wickedness, 


and they die as disbelievers. 126. Do they not see that they are tried once or 
twice every year?!386! Yet they neither repent nor do they learn a lesson. 
127. Whenever a surah is revealed, they look at one another, ‘saying,’ “Is 
anyone watching you?” Then they slip away. ‘It is' Allah "Who’ has turned 
their hearts away because they are a people who do not comprehend. 


Invitation to All 
128. There certainly has come to you a messenger from among yourselves. 
He is concerned by your suffering, anxious for your well-being, and 
gracious and merciful to the believers. 129. But if they turn away, then say, 
"O Prophet,’ “Allah is sufficient for me. There is no god ‘worthy of 
worship’ except Him. In Him I put my trust. And He is the Lord of the 
Mighty Throne.” 
oie 2 oe 


10. Jonah 
(Yunus) 


Similar to the previous stirah, this Meccan sûrah emphasizes Allah’s 
acceptance of repentance, most notably in the case of the people of Jonah 
(verse 98). The pagan claims against the Quran are refuted both in this 
sûrah and the next. The short span of this worldly life and bpgple’s 
ingratitude to their Creator are elaborated upon. The Prophet ( -.(z- (3) is 
urged to exercise patience in the face of denial. The stories of Nogh% people 
and Pharaoh’s people are cited as cautionary tales to the Meccan deniers, 
setting the stage for more elaborate warnings in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Universal Messenger 
1. Alif-Ladm-Ra. These are the verses of the Book, rich in wisdom. 2. Is it 
astonishing to people that We have sent revelation to a man from among 
themselves, "instructing him,’ “Warn humanity and give good news to the 
believers that they will have an honourable status with their Lord.”? Yet the 
disbelievers said, “Indeed, this ‘man’ is clearly a magician!” 


Origin of Creation 

3. Surely your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six 
Days,|282] then established Himself on the Throne, conducting every affair. 
None can intercede except by His permission. That is Allah—your Lord, so 
worship Him ‘alone’. Will you not then be mindful? 4. To Him is your 
return all together. Allah’s promise is ‘always’ true. Indeed, He originates 
the creation then resurrects it so that He may justly reward those who 
believe and do good. But those who disbelieve will have a boiling drink and 
a painful punishment for their disbelief. 


Signs in Allah’s Creation 
5. He is the One Who made the sun a radiant source and the moon a 
reflected light, with precisely ordained phases, so that you may know the 
number of years and calculation ‘of time’. Allah did not create all this 
except for a purpose. He makes the signs clear for people of knowledge. 6. 


Surely in the alternation of the day and the night, and in all that Allah has 
created in the heavens and the earth, there are truly signs for those mindful 
"of Him’. 

Deniers of Resurrection 
7. Indeed, those who do not expect to meet Us, being pleased and content 
with this worldly life, and who are heedless of Our signs, 8. they will have 
the Fire as a home because of what they have committed. 


Guided by Faith 
9. Surely those who believe and do good, their Lord will guide them ‘to 
Paradise’ through their faith, rivers will flow under their feet in the Gardens 
of Bliss, 10. in which their prayer will be, “Glory be to You, O Allah!” and 
their greeting will be, “Peace!” and their closing prayer will be, “All praise 
is for Allah—Lord of all worlds!” 


No Rush for Evil 
11. If Allah were to hasten evil for people!288! as they wish to hasten good, 
they would have certainly been doomed. But We leave those who do not 
expect to meet Us to wander blindly in their defiance. 


The Ungrateful 
12. Whenever someone is touched by hardship, they cry out to Us, whether 
lying on their side, sitting, or standing. But when We relieve their hardship, 
they return to their old ways as if they had never cried to Us to remove any 
hardship! This is how the misdeeds of the transgressors have been made 
appealing to them. 


Warning to the Meccan Pagans 
13. We surely destroyed ‘other’ peoples before you when they did wrong, 
and their messengers came to them with clear proofs but they would not 
believe! This is how We reward the wicked people. 14. Then We made you 
their successors in the land to see how you would act. 


The Pagans Demand a New Quran 
15. When Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who do not expect 
to meet Us say ‘to the Prophet’, “Bring us a different Quran or make some 
changes in it.” Say ‘to them’, “It is not for me to change it on my own. I 
only follow what is revealed to me. I fear, if I were to disobey my Lord, the 
punishment of a tremendous Day.” 16. Say, “Had Allah willed, I would not 


have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I had lived 
my whole life among you before this ‘revelation’. Do you not understand?” 
17. Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against Allah or 
deny His revelations? Indeed, the wicked will never succeed. 


False Gods 
18. They worship besides Allah others who can neither harm nor benefit 
them, and say, “These are our intercessors with Allah.” Ask ‘them, O 
Prophet’, “Are you informing Allah of something He does not know in the 
heavens or the earth? Glorified and Exalted is He above what they associate 
“with Him’!” 
No Longer United by Faith 

19. Humanity was once nothing but a single community ‘of believers’, but 
then they differed.'382! Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord, 
[390] their differences would have been settled ‘at once’. 


Demanding a New Miracle!32! 
20. They ask, “Why has no ‘other’ sign been sent down to him from his 
Lord?” Say, "O Prophet,’ ““The knowledge of" the unseen is with Allah 
alone. So wait! I too am waiting with you.” 


Returning Favour with Denial 
21. When We give people a taste of mercy after being afflicted with a 
hardship, they swiftly devise plots against Our revelations! Say, "O 
Prophet,’ “Allah is swifter in devising ‘punishment’. Surely Our messenger- 
angels record whatever you devise.” 


Metaphor for Human Ingratitude 

22. He is the One Who enables you to travel through land and sea. And it so 
happens that you are on ships, sailing with a favourable wind, to the 
passengers’ delight. Suddenly, the ships are overcome by a gale wind and 
those on board are overwhelmed by waves from every side, and they 
assume they are doomed. They cry out to Allah ‘alone’ in sincere devotion, 
“If You save us from this, we will certainly be grateful.” 23. But as soon as 
He rescues them, they transgress in the land unjustly. O humanity! Your 
transgression is only against your own souls. "There is only’ brief 
enjoyment in this worldly life, then to Us is your return, and then We will 
inform you of what you used to do. 


This Fleeting Life 
24. The life of this world is just like rain We send down from the sky, 
producing a mixture of plants which humans and animals consume. Then 
just as the earth looks its best, perfectly beautified, and its people think they 
have full control over it, there comes to it Our command by night or by day, 
so We mow it down as if it never flourished yesterday! This is how We 
make the signs clear for people who reflect. 


Invitation to Paradise 
25. And Allah invites ‘all” to the Home of Peace and guides whoever He 
wills to the Straight Path. 26. Those who do good will have the finest 
reward'322] and "even" more.'223! Neither gloom nor disgrace will cover 
their faces. It is they who will be the residents of Paradise. They will be 
there forever. 


Warning Against Hell 
27. As for those who commit evil, the reward of an evil deed is its 
equivalent. Humiliation will cover them—vwith no one to protect them from 
Allah—as if their faces were covered with patches of the night’s deep 
darkness. It is they who will be the residents of the Fire. They will be there 
forever. 


False Gods and Their Followers 

28. "Consider’ the Day We will gather them all together then say to those 
who associated others "with Allah in worship’, “Stay in your places—you 
and your associate-gods.” We will separate them from each other, and their 
associate-gods will say, “It was not us that you worshipped! 29. Allah is 
sufficient as a Witness between each of us that we were totally unaware of 
your worship.” 30. Then and there every soul will face "the consequences 
of’ what it had done. They all will be returned to Allah—their True Master. 
And whatever ‘gods’ they fabricated will fail them. 


Questions to Pagans: 1) Who Provides? 
31. Ask "them, O Prophet’, “Who provides for you from heaven and earth? 
Who owns ‘your’ hearing and sight? Who brings forth the living from the 
dead and the dead from the living? And who conducts every affair?” They 
will ‘surely’ say, “Allah.” Say, “Will you not then fear "Him'? 32. That is 
Allah—your True Lord. So what is beyond the truth except falsehood? How 


can you then be turned away?” 33. And so your Lord’s decree has been 
proven true against the rebellious—that they will never believe. 


2) Who Creates? 
34. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Can any of your associate-gods originate 
creation and then resurrect it?” Say, ““Only’ Allah originates creation and 
then resurrects it. How can you then be deluded ‘from the truth?” 


3) Who Guides? 

35. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Can any of your associate-gods guide to the 
truth?” Say, “Only* Allah guides to the truth.” Who then is more worthy to 
be followed: the One Who guides to the truth or those who cannot find the 
way unless guided? What is the matter with you? How do you judge? 36. 
Most of them follow nothing but ‘inherited’ assumptions. "And" surely 
assumptions can in no way replace the truth. Allah is indeed All-Knowing 
of what they do. 


The Challenge of the Quran 

37. It is not ‘possible’ for this Quran to have been produced by anyone other 
than Allah. In fact, it is a confirmation of what came before, and an 
explanation of the Scripture. It is, without a doubt, from the Lord of all 
worlds. 38. Or do they claim, “He!2%4! made it up!”? Tell them "O Prophet’, 
“Produce one surah like it then, and seek help from whoever you can— 
other than Allah—if what you say is true!” 39. In fact, they ‘hastily’ 
rejected the Book without comprehending it and before the fulfilment of its 
warnings. Similarly, those before them were in denial. See then what was 
the end of the wrongdoers! 


It Is Allah Who Guides 

40. Some of them will ‘eventually’ believe in it; others will not. And your 
Lord knows best the corruptors. 41. If they deny you, then say, “My deeds 
are mine and your deeds are yours. You are free of what I do and I am free 
of what you do!” 42. Some of them listen to what you say, but can you 
make the deaf hear even though they do not understand? 43. And some of 
them look at you, but can you guide the blind even though they cannot see? 
[395] 44, Indeed, Allah does not wrong people in the least, but it is people 
who wrong themselves. 


Short Life 


45. On the Day He will gather them, it will be as if they had not stayed "in 
the world” except for an hour of a day,%°! "as though they were only” 
getting to know one another. Lost indeed will be those who denied the 
meeting with Allah, and were not ‘rightly’ guided! 


Warning Before Judgment 
46. Whether We show you "O Prophet’ some of what We threaten them 
with, or cause you to die "before that’, to Us is their return and Allah is a 
Witness over what they do. 47. And for every community there is a 
messenger. After their messenger has come,|222! judgment is passed on 
them in all fairness, and they are not wronged. 


When the Time Comes ... 
48. They ask ‘the believers’, “When will this threat come to pass if what 
you say is true?” 49. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I have no power to benefit or 
protect myself, except by the Will of Allah.” For each community there is 
an appointed term. When their time arrives, they cannot delay it for a 
moment, nor could they advance it. 


Allah’s Torment 
50. Tell them "O Prophet’, “Imagine if His torment were to overcome you 
by night or day—do the wicked realize what they are ‘really’ asking Him to 
hasten? 51. Will you believe in it only after it has overtaken you? Now? But 
you always wanted to hasten it!” 52. Then the wrongdoers will be told, 
“Taste the torment of eternity! Are you not rewarded except for what you 
used to commit?” 


Allah’s Promise 

53. They ask you "O Prophet’, “Is this true?” Say, “Yes, by my Lord! Most 
certainly it is true! And you will have no escape.” 54. If every wrongdoer 
were to possess everything in the world, they would surely ransom 
themselves with it. They will hide ‘their’ remorse when they see the 
torment. And they will be judged in all fairness, and none will be wronged. 
55. Surely to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Surely 
Allah’s promise is ‘always’ true, but most of them do not know. 56. He ‘is 
the One Who’ gives life and causes death, and to Him you will ‘all’ be 
returned. 


Excellence of the Quran 


57. O humanity! Indeed, there has come to you a warning from your Lord, a 
cure for what is in the hearts, a guide, and a mercy for the believers. 58. 
Say, "O Prophet,’ “In Allah’s grace and mercy let them rejoice. That is far 
better than whatever ‘wealth’ they amass.” 


Allah’s Provisions 
59. Ask ‘the pagans, O Prophet’, “Have you seen that which Allah has sent 
down for you as a provision, of which you have made some lawful and 
some unlawful?”!228! Say, “Has Allah given you authorization, or are you 
fabricating lies against Allah?” 60. What do those who fabricate lies against 
Allah expect on Judgment Day? Surely Allah is ever Bountiful to humanity, 
[399] but most of them are ungrateful. 


Allah’s Knowledge 
61. There is no activity you may be engaged in "O Prophet’ or portion of the 
Quran you may be reciting, nor any deed you ‘all’ may be doing except that 
We are a Witness over you while doing it. Not "even" an atom’s weight is 
hidden from your Lord on earth or in heaven; nor anything smaller or larger 
than that, but is written’ in a perfect Record. 42! 


Allah’s Close Servants 
62. There will certainly be no fear for the close servants of Allah, nor will 
they grieve. 63. "They are’ those who are faithful and are mindful ‘of Him’. 
64. For them is good news in this worldly life and the Hereafter. There is no 
change in the promise of Allah. That is ‘truly’ the ultimate triumph. 


The Almighty 
65. Do not let their words grieve you "O Prophet’. Surely all honour and 
power belongs to Allah. He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 66. Certainly 
to Allah ‘alone’ belong all those in the heavens and all those on the earth. 
And what do those who associate others with Allah really follow? They 
follow nothing but assumptions and do nothing but lie. 67. He is the One 
Who has made the night for you to rest in and the day bright. Surely in this 
are signs for people who listen. 
Allah Has No Children 

68. They! say, “Allah has offspring.”'422! Glory be to Him! He is the 
Self-Sufficient. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is 
on the earth. You have no proof of this! Do you say about Allah what you 


do not know? 69. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Indeed, those who fabricate lies against 
Allah will never succeed.” 70. "It is only’ a brief enjoyment in this world, 
then to Us is their return, then We will make them taste the severe 
punishment for their disbelief. 


Noah and His People 

71. Relate to them "O Prophet" the story of Noah when he said to his 
people, “O my People! If my presence and my reminders to you of Allah’s 
signs are unbearable to you, then "know that’ I have put my trust in Allah. 
So devise a plot along with your associate-gods—and you do not have to be 
secretive about your plot—then carry it out against me without delay! 72. 
And if you turn away, ‘remember’ I have never demanded a reward from 
you ‘for delivering the message’. My reward is only from Allah. And I have 
been commanded to be one of those who submit ‘to Allah’.” 73. But they 
still rejected him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark and made 
them successors, and drowned those who rejected Our signs. See then what 
was the end of those who had been warned! 


Messengers After Noah 
74. Then after him We sent ‘other’ messengers to their ‘own’ people and 
they came to them with clear proofs. But they would not believe in what 
they had rejected before. This is how We seal the hearts of the 
transgressors. 


Moses and Aaron 

75. Then after these ‘messengers’ We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and 
his chiefs with Our signs. But they behaved arrogantly and were a wicked 
people. 76. When the truth came to them from Us, they said, “This is 
certainly pure magic!” 77. Moses responded, “Is this what you say about 
the truth when it has come to you? Is this magic? Magicians will never 
succeed.” 78. They argued, “Have you come to turn us away from the faith 
of our forefathers so that the two of you may become supreme in the land? 
We will never believe in you!” 79. Pharaoh demanded, “Bring me every 
skilled magician.” 80. When the magicians came, Moses said to them, “Cast 
whatever you wish to cast!” 81. When they did, Moses said, “What you 
have produced is mere magic, Allah will surely make it useless, for Allah 
certainly does not set right the work of the corruptors. 82. And Allah 
establishes the truth by His Words—even to the dismay of the wicked.” 


A Few Believers 

83. But no one believed in Moses except a few youths of his people, while 
fearing that Pharaoh and their own chiefs might persecute them. And 
certainly Pharaoh was a tyrant in the land, and he was truly a transgressor. 
84. Moses said, “O my people! If you do believe in Allah and submit "to 
His Will’, then put your trust in Him.” 85. They replied, “In Allah we trust. 
Our Lord! Do not subject us to the persecution of the oppressive people, 86. 
and deliver us by Your mercy from the disbelieving people.” 


Power of Prayer 

87. We revealed to Moses and his brother, “Appoint houses for your people 
in Egypt. Turn these houses into places of worship, establish prayer, and 
give good news to the believers!” 88. Moses prayed, “Our Lord! You have 
granted Pharaoh and his chiefs luxuries and riches in this worldly life, 
"which they abused’ to lead people astray from Your Way! Our Lord, 
destroy their riches and harden their hearts so that they will not believe until 
they see the painful punishment.” 89. Allah responded ‘to Moses and 
Aaron’,'493! “Your prayer is answered! So be steadfast and do not follow the 
way of those who do not know.” 


End of Pharaoh 
90. We brought the Children of Israel across the sea. Then Pharaoh and his 
soldiers pursued them unjustly and oppressively. But as Pharaoh was 
drowning, he cried out, “I believe that there is no god except that in whom 
the Children of Israel believe, and I am ‘now’ one of those who submit.” 91. 
"He was told,’ “Now ‘you believe’? But you always disobeyed and were one 
of the corruptors. 92. Today We will preserve your corpse so that you may 
become an example!#24! for those who come after you. And surely most 
people are heedless of Our examples!” 
Allah’s Grace to the Israelites 

93. Indeed, We settled the Children of Israel in a blessed land,'42! and 
granted them good, lawful provisions. They did not differ until knowledge 
came to them.!425! Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of 
Judgment regarding their differences. 


Confirming the Truth 


94. If you "O Prophet’ are in doubt about ‘these stories’ that We have 
revealed to you, then ask those who read the Scripture before you. The truth 
has certainly come to you from your Lord, so do not be one of those who 
doubt, 95. and do not be one of those who deny Allah’s signs or you will be 
one of the losers.!402! 


Jonah’s People Spared from Torment 
96. Indeed, those against whom Allah’s decree ‘of torment’ is justified will 
not believe— 97. even if every sign were to come to them—until they see 
the painful punishment. 98. If only there had been a society which believed 
"before seeing the torment’ and, therefore, benefited from its belief, like the 
people of Jonah.'428! When they believed, We lifted from them the torment 
of disgrace in this world and allowed them enjoyment for a while.!422! 


Conviction, Not Compulsion 
99. Had your Lord so willed "O Prophet’, all "people’ on earth would have 
certainly believed, every single one of them! Would you then force people 
to become believers? 100. It is not for any soul to believe except by Allah’s 
leave, and He will bring His wrath upon those who are unmindful. 


Invitation to Think 
101. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Consider all that is in the heavens and the earth!” 
Yet neither signs nor warners are of any benefit to those who refuse to 
believe. 102. Are they waiting for “anything’ except the same torments that 
befell those before them? Say, “Keep waiting then! I too am waiting with 
you.” 103. Then We saved Our messengers and those who believed. For it is 
Our duty to save the believers. 


True Faith 
104. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O humanity! If you are in doubt of my faith, then 
"know that’ I do not worship those ‘idols’ you worship instead of Allah. But 
I worship Allah, Who has the power to cause your death. And I have been 
commanded, ‘Be one of the believers,’ 105. and, ‘Be steadfast in faith in all 
uprightness, and do not be one of the polytheists,’ 106. and ‘Do not invoke, 
instead of Allah, what can neither benefit nor harm you—for if you do, then 
you will certainly be one of the wrongdoers,’ 107. and ‘If Allah touches you 
with harm, none can undo it except Him. And if He intends good for you, 


none can withhold His bounty. He grants it to whoever He wills of His 
servants. And He is the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.’” 


Call to Humanity 
108. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O humanity! The truth has surely come to you from 
your Lord. So whoever chooses to be guided, it is only for their own good. 
And whoever chooses to stray, it is only to their own loss. And I am not a 
keeper over you.” 


Advice to the Prophet 
109. And follow what is revealed to you, and be patient until Allah passes 
His judgment. For He is the Best of Judges. 
oie ke ae 


11. Hid 
(Hid) 
wise ' 
This Meccan sûrah is named after Prophet Hid ( (7712), whose ogy is 
mentioned in verses 50-60. More details are given/aBéut Noah ( {472 in 
this sûrah than the previous sûrah and Sirah 7. Just like the previodSsiarah, 
the stories of destroyed disb¢Bevers are meant to deter the Arab pagans and 
reassure the Prophet (.{z.[;) of his ultimate triumph, and a reference is 
made to the reward of te toliovers and the punishment of the disbelievers 
in the Hereafter. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Message of the Quran 
1. Alif-Lam-Ra. "This is' a Book whose verses are well perfected and then 
fully explained. "It is’ from the One "Who is’ All-Wise, All-Aware. 2. ‘Tell 
them, O Prophet,’ “Worship none but Allah. Surely I am a warner and 
deliverer of good news to you from Him. 3. And seek your Lord’s 
forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. He will grant you a good 
provision for an appointed term and graciously reward the doers of good. 
But if you turn away, then I truly fear for you the torment of a formidable 
Day. 4. To Allah is your return. And He is Most Capable of everything.” 
Hiding Disbelief 
5. Indeed, they'*2! enfold "what is in’ their hearts, "trying” to hide it from 
Him! But even when they cover themselves with their clothes, He knows 
what they conceal and what they reveal. Surely He knows best what is 
hidden’ in the heart. 
Allah’s Might 

6. There is no moving creature on earth whose provision is not guaranteed 
by Allah. And He knows where it lives and where it is laid to rest. All is 
“written” in a perfect Record.'4#! 7, He is the One Who created the heavens 
and the earth in six Days'*!4|and His Throne was upon the waters—in 
order to test which of you is best in deeds. And if you "O Prophet’ say, 
“Surely you will ‘all’ be raised up after death,” the disbelievers will 


certainly say, “That is nothing but pure magic!” 8. And if We delay their 
punishment until an appointed time, they will definitely say, “What is 
holding it back?” Indeed, on the Day it overtakes them, it will not be 
averted from them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to 
ridicule. 


Adversity and Prosperity 
9. If We give people a taste of Our mercy then take it away from them, they 
become utterly desperate, ungrateful. 10. But if We give them a taste of 
prosperity after being touched with adversity, they say, “My ills are gone,” 
and become totally prideful and boastful, 11. except those who patiently 
endure and do good. It is they who will have forgiveness and a mighty 
reward. 


Pagan Annoyances 
12. Perhaps you "O Prophet’ may wish to give up some of what is revealed 
to you and may be distressed by it because they say, “If only a treasure had 
been sent down to him, or an angel had come with him!” You are only a 
warner, and Allah is the Trustee of All Affairs. 


Challenging the Pagans 
13. Or do they say, “He!4!2! has fabricated this "Quran"!”? Say, "O Prophet,” 
“Produce ten fabricated sûrahs like it and seek help from whoever you can 
—other than Allah—if what you say is true!” 14. But if your helpers fail 
you, then know that it has been revealed with the knowledge of Allah, and 
that there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him! Will you ‘not’ then 
submit ‘to Allah ? 


Fleeting Gain 
15. Whoever desires ‘only’ this worldly life and its luxuries, We will pay 
them in full for their deeds in this life—nothing will be left out. 16. It is 
they who will have nothing in the Hereafter except the Fire. Their efforts in 
this life will be fruitless and their deeds will be useless. 


Everlasting Gain 
17. ‘Can these people be compared to’ those ‘believers’ who stand on clear 
proof from their Lord, backed by ‘the Quran as’ a witness from Him, and 
preceded by the Book of Moses ‘which was revealed’ as a guide and mercy? 
It is those ‘believers’ who have faith in it. But whoever from the 


‘disbelieving' groups rejects it, the Fire will be their destiny. So do not be in 
doubt of it. It is certainly the truth from your Lord, but most people do not 
believe. 


The Losers 

18. Who does more wrong than those who fabricate lies against Allah? 
They will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses!4!4! will say, 
“These are the ones who lied against their Lord.” Surely Allah’s 
condemnation is upon the wrongdoers, 19. who hinder ‘others’ from Allah’s 
Path, striving to make it ‘appear’ crooked, and disbelieve in the Hereafter. 
20. They will never frustrate Allah on earth, and they will have no protector 
besides Allah. Their punishment will be multiplied, for they failed to hear 
or see ‘the truth’. 21. It is they who have ruined themselves, and whatever 
gods’ they fabricated will fail them. 22. Without a doubt, they will be the 
worst losers in the Hereafter. 


The Winners 
23. Surely those who believe, do good, and humble themselves before their 
Lord will be the residents of Paradise. They will be there forever. 


The Disbelievers and the Believers 
24. The example of these two parties is that of the blind and the deaf, 
compared to the seeing and the hearing. Can the two be equal? Will you not 
then be mindful? 


Prophet Noah 

25. Surely We sent Noah to his people. "He said,’ “Indeed, I am sent to you 
with a clear warning 26. that you should worship none but Allah. I truly 
fear for you the torment of a painful Day.” 27. The disbelieving chiefs of 
his people said, “We see you only as a human being like ourselves, and we 
see that no one follows you except the lowliest among us, who do so 
“hastily” without thinking.'4!2! We do not see anything that makes "all of" 
you any better than us. In fact, we think you are liars.” 


Noah’s Argument 
28. He said, “O my people! Consider if I stand on a clear proof from my 
Lord and He has blessed me with a mercy from Himself,'4!6! which you fail 
to see. Should we ‘then’ force it on you against your will? 29. O my people! 
I do not ask you for a payment for this ‘message’. My reward is only from 


Allah. And I will never dismiss the believers, for they will surely meet their 
Lord. But I can see that you are a people acting ignorantly. 30. O my 
people! Who would protect me from Allah if I were to dismiss them? Will 
you not then be mindful? 31. I do not say to you that I possess Allah’s 
treasuries or know the unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel, nor do I say 
that Allah will never grant goodness to those you look down upon. Allah 
knows best what is ‘hidden’ within them. "If I did," then I would truly be 
one of the wrongdoers.” 


His People’s Response 
32. They protested, “O Noah! You have argued with us far too much, so 
bring upon us what you threaten us with, if what you say is true.” 33. He 
responded, “It is Allah Who can bring it upon you if He wills, and then you 
will have no escape! 34. My advice will not benefit you—no matter how 
hard I try—if Allah wills 'for’ you to stray. He is your Lord, and to Him you 
will ‘all’ be returned.” 


The Pagans Discredit the Quran 
35. Or do they say, “Hel4!7] has fabricated this "Quran™!”? Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“If I have done so, then I bear the burden of that sin! But I am free from 
your sinful accusation.” 


The Ark 
36. And it was revealed to Noah, “None of your people will believe except 
those who already have. So do not be distressed by what they have been 
doing. 37. And build the Ark under Our ‘watchful’ Eyes and directions, and 
do not plead with Me for those who have done wrong, for they will surely 
be drowned.” 38. So he began to build the Ark, and whenever some of the 
chiefs of his people passed by, they mocked him. He said, “If you laugh at 
us, we will ‘soon’ laugh at you similarly. 39. You will soon come to know 
who will be visited by a humiliating torment ‘in this life’ and overwhelmed 


1°99 


by an everlasting punishment "in the next’. 


The Flood 
40. And when Our command came and the oven burst "with water’,!4!8! We 
said "to Noah’, “Take into the Ark a pair from every species along with your 
family—except those against whom the decree "to drown’ has already been 
passed—and those who believe.” But none believed with him except for a 


few. 41. And he said, “Board it! In the Name of Allah it will sail and cast 
anchor. Surely my Lord is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” 


Noah’s Son 

42. And "so` the Ark sailed with them through waves like mountains. Noah 
called out to his son, who stood apart, “O my dear son! Come aboard with 
us and do not be with the disbelievers.” 43. He replied, “I will take refuge 
on a mountain, which will protect me from the water.” Noah cried, “Today 
no one is protected from Allah’s decree except those to whom He shows 
mercy!” And the waves came between them, and his son was among the 
drowned. 44. And it was said, “O earth! Swallow up your water. And O 
sky! Withhold ‘your rain’.” The floodwater receded and the decree was 
carried out. The Ark rested on Mount Judi, and it was said, “Away with the 
wrongdoing people!” 


Noah Pleading for His Son 

45. Noah called out to his Lord, saying, “My Lord! Certainly my son is 
also’ of my family, Your promise is surely true, and You are the most just 
of all judges!” 46. Allah replied, “O Noah! He is certainly not of your 
family—he was entirely of unrighteous conduct. So do not ask Me about 
what you have no knowledge of! I warn you so you do not fall into 
ignorance.” 47. Noah pleaded, “My Lord, I seek refuge in You from asking 
You about what I have no knowledge of, and unless You forgive me and 
have mercy on me, I will be one of the losers.” 48. It was said, “O Noah! 
Disembark with Our peace and blessings on you and some of the 
descendants of those with you. As for the others, We will allow them ‘a 
brief’ enjoyment, then they will be touched with a painful punishment from 
Us.” 


Stories of the Past 
49. This is one of the stories of the unseen, which we reveal to you "O 
Prophet’. Neither you nor your people knew it before this. So be patient! 
Surely the ultimate outcome belongs ‘only’ to the righteous. 


Prophet Hiid 
50. And to the people of ’Ad We sent their brother Hûd. He said, “O my 
people! Worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. You do nothing 
but fabricate lies "against Allah’. 51. O my people! I do not ask you for any 


reward for this "message". My reward is only from the One Who created 
me. Will you not then understand? 52. And O my people! Seek your Lord’s 
forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. He will shower you with rain in 
abundance, and add strength to your strength. So do not turn away, 
persisting in wickedness.” 


His People’s Response and His Argument 

53. They argued, “O Hûd! You have not given us any clear proof, and we 
will never abandon our gods upon your word, nor will we believe in you. 
54. All we can say is that some of our gods have possessed you with evil.” 
He said, “I call Allah to witness, and you too bear witness, that I ‘totally’ 
reject whatever you associate 55. with Him ‘in worship’. So let all of you 
plot against me without delay! 56. I have put my trust in Allah—my Lord 
and your Lord. There is no living creature that is not completely under His 
control.'4!2! Surely my Lord’s Way is perfect justice.'422! 57. But if you turn 
away, I have already delivered to you what I have been sent with. My Lord 
will replace you with others. You are not harming Him in the least. Indeed, 
my Lord is a ‘vigilant’ Keeper over all things.” 


The Torment 
58. When Our command came, We rescued Hid and those who believed 
with him by a mercy from Us, saving them from a harsh torment. 59. That 
was ’Ad. They denied the signs of their Lord, disobeyed His messengers, 
[421] and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant. 60. They were 
followed by a curse in this world, as they will be on the Day of Judgment. 
Surely ’Ad denied their Lord. So away with ’Ad, the people of Hûd. 
Prophet Salih 
61. And to the people of Thamûd We sent their brother Salih. He said, “O 
my people! Worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. He ‘is the One 
Who’ produced you from the earth and settled you on it. So seek His 
forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance. Surely my Lord is Ever Near, 


1°99 


All-Responsive ‘to prayers’. 


His People’s Argument 
62. They argued, “O Salih! We truly had high hopes in you before this.!422! 
How dare you forbid us to worship what our forefathers had worshipped? 
We are certainly in alarming doubt about what you are inviting us to.” 


His Response 

63. He responded, “O my people! Consider if I stand on a clear proof from 
my Lord and He has blessed me with a mercy from Him. Who could help 
me against Allah if I were to disobey Him? You would only contribute to 
my doom. 64. And O my people! This she-camel of Allah is a sign for you. 
[423] So leave her to graze “freely” on Allah’s earth and do her no harm, or a 
swift punishment will overtake you!” 65. But they killed her, so he warned 
‘them’, “You have ‘only’ three ‘more’ days to enjoy life in your homes— 
this is an unfailing promise!” 


The Torment 
66. When Our command came, We saved Salih and those who believed 
with him by a mercy from Us and spared them the disgrace of that Day. 
Surely your Lord ‘alone’ is the All-Powerful, Almighty. 67. And the 
"mighty" blast overtook the wrongdoers, so they fell lifeless in their homes, 
68. as if they had never lived there. Surely Thamfd denied their Lord, so 
away with Thamûd! 


Abraham Visited by Angels 
69. And surely Our messenger-angels came to Abraham with good news ‘of 
a son’. They greeted "him with’, “Peace!” And he replied, “Peace "be upon 
you"!” Then it was not long before he brought ‘them’ a ‘fat,’ roasted calf. 
70. And when he saw that their hands did not reach for the food, he became 
suspicious and fearful of them. |424! They reassured ‘him’, “Do not be afraid! 
We are ‘angels’ sent ‘only’ against the people of Lot.” 


Good News to Sarah 
71. And his wife was standing by, so she laughed,!425! then We gave her 
good news of ‘the birth of" Isaac, and, after him, Jacob. 72. She wondered, 
“Oh, my! How can I have a child in this old age, and my husband here is an 
old man? This is truly an astonishing thing!” 73. They responded, “Are you 
astonished by Allah’s decree? May Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon 
you, O people of this house. Indeed, He is Praiseworthy, All-Glorious.” 


Abraham Pleading for Lot’s People 
74. Then after the fear had left Abraham, and the good news had reached 
him, he began to plead with Us for the people of Lot. 75. Truly, Abraham 
was forbearing, tender-hearted, and ever turning ‘to his Lord’. 76. "The 


angels said,’ “O Abraham! Plead no more! Your Lord’s decree has already 
come, and they will certainly be afflicted with a punishment that cannot be 
averted!” 


Lot’s Handsome Guests 

77. When Our messenger-angels came to Lot, he was distressed and 
worried by their arrival.'426] He said, “This is a terrible day.” 78. And ‘the 
men of’ his people—who were used to shameful deeds—came to him 
rushing. He pleaded, “O my people! Here are my daughters!422! "for 
marriage’—they are pure for you. So fear Allah, and do not humiliate me by 
disrespecting my guests. Is there not ‘even’ a single right-minded man 
among you?” 79. They argued, “You certainly know that we have no need 
for your daughters. You already know what we desire!” 80. He responded, 
“If only I had the strength ‘to resist you’ or could rely on a strong 
Supporter.” 


Reassuring Lot 
81. The angels said, “O Lot! We are the messengers of your Lord. They will 
never reach you. So travel with your family in the dark of night, and do not 
let any of you look back, except your wife. She will certainly suffer the fate 
of the others.'428! Their appointed time is the morning. Is the morning not 
near?” 


The Torment 
82. When Our command came, We turned the cities upside down and rained 
down on them clustered stones of baked clay, 83. marked by your Lord "O 
Prophet’. And these stones are not far from the ‘pagan’ wrongdoers! 


Prophet Shu’aib 

84. And to the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu’aib. He said, “O 
my people! Worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. And do not 
give short measure and weight. I do see you in prosperity now, but I truly 
fear for you the torment of an overwhelming Day. 85. O my people! Give 
full measure and weigh with justice. Do not defraud people of their 
property, nor go about spreading corruption in the land. 86. What is left ‘as 
a lawful gain’ by Allah is far better for you if you are ‘truly’ believers. And 
I am not a keeper over you.” 


His People’s Response 


87. They asked ‘sarcastically’, “O Shu’aib! Does your prayer command you 
that we should abandon what our forefathers worshipped or give up 
managing our wealth as we please? Indeed, you are such a tolerant, sensible 
man!” 


Shu’aib’s Argument 

88. He said, “O my people! Consider if I stand on a clear proof from my 
Lord and He has blessed me with a good provision from Him. I do not want 
to do what I am forbidding you from. I only intend reform to the best of my 
ability. My success comes only through Allah. In Him I trust and to Him I 
turn. 89. O my people! Do not let your opposition to me lead you to a fate 
similar to that of the people of Noah, or Hûd, or Salih. And the people of 
Lot are not far from you. 4291 90. So seek your Lord’s forgiveness and turn 
to Him in repentance. Surely my Lord is Most Merciful, All-Loving.” 


The Threat 
91. They threatened, “O Shu’aib! We do not comprehend much of what you 
say, and surely we see you powerless among us. Were it not for your clan, 
we would have certainly stoned you, for you are nothing to us.” 


Shu’aib’s Response 
92. He said, “O my people! Do you have more regard for my clan than for 
Allah, turning your back on Him entirely? Surely my Lord is Fully Aware 
of what you do. 93. O my people! Persist in your ways, for I ‘too’ will 
persist in mine. You will soon come to know who will be visited by a 
humiliating torment and is a liar! And watch! I too am watching with you!” 


The Torment 
94. When Our command came, We saved Shu’aib and those who believed 
with him by a mercy from Us. And the ‘mighty’ blast overtook the 
wrongdoers, so they fell lifeless in their homes, 95. as if they had never 
lived there. So away with Midian as it was with Thamûd! 


Prophet Moses 
96. Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs and compelling proof 97. to 
Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and 
Pharaoh’s command was not well guided. 98. He will be before his people 
on the Day of Judgment and will lead them into the Fire. What an evil place 


to be led into! 99. They were followed by a curse in this ‘life’ and ‘will 
receive another’ on the Day of Judgment. What an evil gift to receive! 


Reward of Wickedness 

100. These are accounts, We relate to you "O Prophet’, of the ‘destroyed’ 
cities. Some are still standing ‘barren’, while others have been mowed 
down. 101. We did not wrong them, rather they wronged themselves. The 
gods they invoked beside Allah were of no help at all when the command of 
your Lord came, and only contributed to their ruin. 102. Such is the 
“crushing” grip of your Lord when He seizes the societies entrenched in 
wrongdoing. Indeed, His grip is ‘terribly’ painful and severe. 


Judgment Day 
103. Surely in this is a sign for those who fear the torment of the Hereafter. 
That is a Day for which humanity will be gathered and a Day ‘that will be’ 
witnessed ‘by all’. 104. We only delay it for a fixed term. 105. When that 
Day arrives, no one will dare speak except with His permission. Some of 
them will be miserable, others joyful. 

The Miserable 
106. As for those bound for misery, they will be in the Fire, where they will 
be sighing and gasping, 107. staying there forever, as long as the heavens 
and the earth will endure, except what your Lord wills.!2! Surely your 
Lord does what He intends. 


The Joyful 
108. And as for those destined to joy, they will be in Paradise, staying there 
forever, as long as the heavens and the earth will endure, except what your 
Lord wills!“24!—a “generous” giving, without end. 


Blind Following 
109. So do not be in doubt "O Prophet" about what those ‘pagans’ worship. 
They worship nothing except what their forefathers worshipped before 
‘them’. And We will certainly give them their share "of punishment’ in full, 
without any reduction. 


The Torah 
110. Indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture, but differences arose 


regarding it. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord,'“22! their 
differences would have been settled ‘at once’. They are truly in alarming 


doubt about it. 111. And surely your Lord will fully pay all for their deeds. 
He is certainly All-Aware of what they do. 


Advice to the Believers 

112. So be steadfast as you are commanded "O Prophet’, along with those 
who turn "in submission to Allah’ with you. And do not transgress. Surely 
He is All-Seeing of what you ‘believers’ do. 113. And do not be inclined to 
the wrongdoers or you will be touched by the Fire. For then you would have 
no protectors other than Allah, nor would you be helped. 114. Establish 
prayer "O Prophet’ at both ends of the day and in the early part of the night. 
[4331 Surely good deeds wipe out evil deeds. That is a reminder for the 
mindful. 115. And be patient! Certainly Allah does not discount the reward 
of the good-doers. 


Speaking out Against Evil 
116. If only there had been among the ‘destroyed’ peoples before you, "O 
believers,’ virtuous individuals who forbade corruption in the land—other 
than the few We had saved ‘from the torment’. But the wrongdoers ‘only’ 
pursued their ‘worldly’ pleasures, becoming wicked. 117. And your Lord "O 
Prophet’ would never destroy a society unjustly while its people were acting 
rightly. 
Free Choice 

118. Had your Lord so willed, He would have certainly made humanity one 
single community ‘of believers’, but they will always ‘choose to` differ— 
119. except those shown mercy by your Lord—and so He created them ‘to 
choose freely’. And so the Word of your Lord will be fulfilled: “I will 
surely fill up Hell with jinn and humans all together.” 


Moral of the Stories 
120. And We relate to you "O Prophet’ the stories of the messengers to 
reassure your heart. And there has come to you in this ‘sarah’ the truth, a 
warning ‘to the disbelievers’, and a reminder to the believers. 121. Say to 
those who disbelieve, “Persist in your ways; we will certainly persist in 
ours. 122. And wait! Surely we ‘too’ are waiting.” 


Allah Almighty 


123. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs the knowledge of what is hidden in the 
heavens and the earth. And to Him all matters are returned. So worship Him 


and put your trust in Him. And your Lord is never unaware of what you do. 
kkk 


12. Joseph 
(Yusuf) 


Rightfully called ‘the best of stories,’ this uplifting Meccan stirah was 
revealed along yyitls the two previous sûrahs at a critical time in the life of 
the Prophet ( -{z- [;) following the death of his wife Khadijah and his uncle 
Abu Talib, His%wo main supporters, shortly after a 3-year boycott by the 
Mespåg pagans to suppress the believers. This is the story of Joseph 
(la) whose half-brothers were „Jiyen by jealousy, conspiring to 
aA him from his father Jacob ( .{z-[;). Joseph was sold into slavery 
in Egypt, falsely accused, and impri fopggreral years, only by ome 
Egypt’s Chief Minister. Just like Joseph ( - A the Prophet ( .{z.[;) had 
to live away from his hometown, was/fa¢ed with false alldgafons and 
abused by his own people pil ultimately became Arabia’s undisputed 
leader. When the Prophet ( -(z-{;) triumphed over Mecca after many years 
of persecution, he reared he very people who abused him with grace, 
recalling the words of Joseph when his brothers begged for mercy in verse 
92, “There is no blame on you today. May Allah forgive you! He is the Most 
Merciful of the merciful!” 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Best of Stories 
1. Alif-Lãm-Ra. These are the verses of the clear Book. 2. Indeed, We have 
sent it down as an Arabic Quran!““4! so that you may understand.'422! 3. We 
relate to you "O Prophet’ the best of stories through Our revelation of this 
Quran, though before this you were totally unaware ‘of them’. 


Joseph’s Dream 
4. "Remember’ when Joseph said to his father, “O my dear father! Indeed I 
dreamt of eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon—I saw them prostrating 
to me!”/436] 5, He replied, “O my dear son! Do not relate your vision to 
your brothers, or they will devise a plot against you. Surely Satan is a sworn 
enemy to humankind. 6. And so will your Lord choose you "O Joseph’, and 
teach you the interpretation of dreams, and perfect His favour upon you and 


the descendants of Jacob—'just’ as He once perfected it upon your 
forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Surely your Lord is All-Knowing, All- 
Wise.” 


Conspiracy by Joseph’s Brothers 

7. Indeed, in the story of Joseph and his brothers there are lessons for all 
who ask. 8. “Remember’ when they said "to one another’, “Surely Joseph 
and his brother "Benjamin* are more beloved to our father than we, even 
though we are a group of so many.'42Z! Indeed, our father is clearly 
mistaken. 9. Kill Joseph or cast him out to some ‘distant’ land so that our 
father’s attention will be only ours, then after that you may ‘repent and’ 
become righteous people!” 10. One of them said, “Do not kill Joseph. But if 
you must do something, throw him into the bottom of a well so perhaps he 
may be picked up by some travellers.” 


Convincing Jacob 
11. They said, “O our father! Why do you not trust us with Joseph, although 
we truly wish him well? 12. Send him out with us tomorrow so that he may 
enjoy himself and play. And we will really watch over him.” 13. He 
responded, “It would truly sadden me if you took him away with you, and I 
fear that a wolf may devour him while you are negligent of him.” 14. They 
said, “If a wolf were to devour him, despite our strong group, then we 
would certainly be losers!” 15. And so, when they took him away and 
decided to throw him into the bottom of the well, We inspired him: “‘One 
day" you will remind them of this deed of theirs while they are unaware ‘of 


1°99 


who you are’. 
Faking Joseph’s Death 

16. Then they returned to their father in the evening, weeping. 17. They 
cried, “Our father! We went racing and left Joseph with our belongings, and 
a wolf devoured him! But you will not believe us, no matter how truthful 
we are.” 18. And they brought his shirt, stained with false blood.!438! He 
responded, “No! Your souls must have tempted you to do something ‘evil’. 
So ‘I can only endure with" beautiful patience!!422! It is Allah’s help that I 
seek to bear your claims.” 


Joseph Sold into Slavery 


19. And there came some travellers, and they sent their water-boy who let 
down his bucket into the well. He cried out, “Oh, what a great find! Here is 
a boy!” And they took him secretly "to be sold’ as merchandise, but Allah is 
All-Knowing of what they did. 20. They ‘later’ sold him for a cheap price, 
just a few silver coins—only wanting to get rid of him.!442! 


Joseph in Egypt 
21. The man from Egypt!!! who bought him said to his wife, “Take good 
care of him, perhaps he may be useful to us or we may adopt him as a son.” 
This is how We established Joseph in the land, so that We might teach him 
the interpretation of dreams. Allah’s Will always prevails, but most people 
do not know. 22. And when he reached maturity, We gave him wisdom and 
knowledge. This is how We reward the good-doers. 


The Temptation 

23. And the lady, in whose house he lived, tried to seduce him. She locked 
the doors ‘firmly’ and said, “Come to me!” He replied, “Allah is my refuge! 
It is "not right to betray’ my master, who has taken good care of me. Indeed, 
the wrongdoers never succeed.” 24. She advanced towards him, and he 
would have done likewise, had he not seen a sign from his Lord.!“42! This is 
how We kept evil and indecency away from him, for he was truly one of 
Our chosen servants. 25. They raced for the door and she tore his shirt from 
the back, only to find her husband at the door. She cried, “What is the 
penalty for someone who tried to violate your wife, except imprisonment or 
a painful punishment?” 


The Witness 

26. Joseph responded, “It was she who tried to seduce me.” And a witness 
from her own family testified: “If his shirt is torn from the front, then she 
has told the truth and he is a liar. 27. But if it is torn from the back, then she 
has lied and he is truthful.” 28. So when her husband saw that Joseph’s shirt 
was torn from the back, he said ‘to her’, “This must be ‘an example’ of the 
cunning of you "women"! Indeed, your cunning is so shrewd! 29. O Joseph! 
Forget about this. And you "O wife"! Seek forgiveness for your sin.'*2! It 
certainly has been your fault.” 


The Women and Joseph’s Beauty 


30. Some women of the city gossiped, “The Chief Minister’s wife is trying 
to seduce her slave-boy. Love for him has plagued her heart. Indeed, we see 
that she is clearly mistaken.”!“4! 31. When she heard about their gossip, 
[445] she invited them and set a banquet for them. She gave each one a knife, 
then said "to Joseph’, “Come out before them.” When they saw him, they 
were so stunned “by his beauty’ that they cut their hands,'44°! and 
exclaimed, “Good God! This cannot be human; this must be a noble angel!” 
32. She said, “This is the one for whose love you criticized me! I did try to 
seduce him but he ‘firmly’ refused. And if he does not do what I order him 
to, he will certainly be imprisoned and ‘fully’ disgraced.”!““Z! 


The Lesser of Two Evils 
33. Joseph prayed, “My Lord! I would rather be in jail than do what they 
invite me to. And if You do not turn their cunning away from me, I might 
yield to them and fall into ignorance.” 34. So his Lord responded to him, 
turning their cunning away from him. Surely He is the All-Hearing, All- 
Knowing. 35. And so it occurred to those in charge, despite seeing all the 
proofs "of his innocence’, that he should be imprisoned for a while.!“8! 


Dreams of the Two Inmates 
36. And two other servants went to jail with Joseph. One of them said, “I 
dreamt I was pressing wine.” The other said, “I dreamt I was carrying 
‘some’ bread on my head, from which birds were eating.” "Then both said," 
“Tell us their interpretation, for we surely see you as one of the good- 
doers.” 


Invitation to the Truth 
37. Joseph replied, “I can even tell you what kind of meal you will be 
served before you receive it. This ‘knowledge’ is from what my Lord has 
taught me. I have shunned the faith of a people who disbelieve in Allah and 
deny the Hereafter. 38. I follow the faith of my fathers: Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob. It is not ‘right’ for us to associate anything with Allah "in worship’. 
This is part of Allah’s grace upon us and humanity, but most people are not 
grateful. 39. O my fellow-prisoners! Which is far better: many different 
lords or Allah—the One, the Supreme? 40. Whatever ‘idols’ you worship 
instead of Him are mere names which you and your forefathers have made 
up!“42!_a practice Allah has never authorized. It is only Allah Who 


decides. He has commanded that you worship none but Him. That is the 
upright faith, but most people do not know. 


Interpretation of the Dreams 
41. “O my fellow-prisoners! "The first’ one of you will serve wine to his 
master, and the other will be crucified and the birds will eat from his head. 
The matter about which you inquired has been decided.” 42. Then he said to 
the one he knew would survive, “Mention me in the presence of your 
master,'499]” But Satan made him forget to mention Joseph to his master, so 
he remained in prison for several years. 


The King’s Dream 

43. And ‘one day” the King! said, “I dreamt of seven fat cows eaten up 
by seven skinny ones; and seven green ears of grain and ‘seven’ others dry. 
O chiefs! Tell me the meaning of my dream if you can interpret dreams.” 
44. They replied, “These are confused visions and we do not know the 
interpretation of such dreams.” 45. ‘Finally,’ the surviving ex-prisoner 
remembered ‘Joseph’ after a long time and said, “I will tell you its 
interpretation, so send me forth ‘to Joseph’.” 


Interpretation of the King’s Dream 
46. "He said,’ “Joseph, O man of truth! Interpret for us "the dream of' seven 
fat cows eaten up by seven skinny ones; and seven green ears of grain and 
seven’ others dry, so that I may return to the people and let them know.” 
47. Joseph replied, “You will plant ‘grain’ for seven consecutive years, 
leaving in the ear whatever you will harvest, except for the little you will 
eat. 48. Then after that will come seven years of great hardship which will 
consume whatever you have saved, except the little you will store ‘for 
seed’. 49. Then after that will come a year in which people will receive 


1°99 


abundant rain and they will press ‘oil and wine’. 


Joseph Declared Innocent 
50. The King ‘then’ said, “Bring him to me.” When the messenger came to 
him, Joseph said, “Go back to your master and ask him about the case of the 
women who cut their hands. Surely my Lord has ‘full’ knowledge of their 
cunning.” 51. The King asked ‘the women’, “What did you get when you 
tried to seduce Joseph?” They replied, “Allah forbid! We know nothing 
indecent about him.” Then the Chief Minister’s wife admitted, “Now the 


truth has come to light. It was I who tried to seduce him, and he is surely 
truthful. 52. From this, Joseph should know that I did not speak dishonestly 
about him in his absence, for Allah certainly does not guide the scheming of 
the dishonest. 53. And I do not seek to free myself from blame, for indeed 
the soul is ever inclined to evil, except those shown mercy by my Lord. 
Surely my Lord is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” 


Joseph, the Chief Minister 

54. The King said, “Bring him to me. I will employ him exclusively in my 
service.” And when Joseph spoke to him, the King said, “Today you are 
highly esteemed and fully trusted by us.” 55. Joseph proposed, “Put me in 
charge of the store-houses of the land, for I am truly reliable and adept.” 56. 
This is how We established Joseph in the land to settle wherever he pleased. 
We shower Our mercy on whoever We will, and We never discount the 
reward of the good-doers. 57. And the reward of the Hereafter is far better 
for those who are faithful and are mindful ‘of Allah’. 


Joseph’s Brothers Visit Egypt!492! 

58. And Joseph’s brothers came and entered his presence. He recognized 
them but they were unaware of who he really was. 59. When he had 
provided them with their supplies, he demanded, “Bring me your brother on 
your father’s side.'423! Do you not see that I give full measure and I am the 
best of hosts? 60. But if you do not bring him to me ‘next time’, I will have 
no grain for you, nor will you ever come close to me again.” 61. They 
promised, “We will try to convince his father to let him come. We will 
certainly do ‘our best.” 62. Joseph ordered his servants to put his brothers’ 
money back into their saddlebags so that they would find it when they 
returned to their family and perhaps they would come back. 


The Brothers Return Home 
63. When Joseph’s brothers returned to their father, they pleaded, “O our 
father! We have been denied ‘further’ supplies. So send our brother with us 
so that we may receive our measure, and we will definitely watch over 
him.” 64. He responded, “Should I trust you with him as I once trusted you 
with his brother ‘Joseph’? But ‘only’ Allah is the best Protector, and He is 
the Most Merciful of the merciful.” 65. When they opened their bags, they 
discovered that their money had been returned to them. They argued, “O 


our father! What more can we ask for? Here is our money, fully returned to 
us. Now we can buy more food for our family. We will watch over our 
brother, and obtain an extra camel-load of grain. That load can be easily 
secured.” 


Jacob’s Wisdom 

66. Jacob insisted, “I will not send him with you until you give me a solemn 
oath by Allah that you will certainly bring him back to me, unless you are 
totally overpowered.” Then after they had given him their oaths, he 
concluded, “Allah is a Witness to what we have said.” 67. He then 
instructed ‘them’, “O my sons! Do not enter ‘the city’ all through one gate, 
but through separate gates.'454! | cannot help you against "what is destined 
by’ Allah in the least. It is only Allah Who decides. In Him I put my trust. 
And in Him let the faithful put their trust.” 68. Then when they entered as 
their father had instructed them, this did not help them against ‘the Will of’ 
Allah whatsoever. It was just a desire in Jacob’s heart which he satisfied. He 
was truly blessed with ‘great’ knowledge because of what We had taught 
him, but most people have no knowledge. 


The Royal Cup!#29! 

69. When they entered Joseph’s presence, he called his brother ‘Benjamin’ 
aside, and confided ‘to him’, “I am indeed your brother "Joseph"! So do not 
feel distressed about what they have been doing.” 70. When Joseph had 
provided them with supplies, he slipped the royal cup into his brother’s bag. 
Then a herald cried, “O people of the caravan! You must be thieves!” 71. 
They asked, turning back, “What have you lost?” 72. The herald ‘along with 
the guards’ replied, “We have lost the King’s measuring cup. And whoever 
brings it will be awarded a camel-load ‘of grain’. I guarantee it.” 73. 
Joseph’s brothers replied, “By Allah! You know well that we did not come 
to cause trouble in the land, nor are we thieves.” 74. Joseph’s men asked, 
“What should be the price for theft, if you are lying?” 75. Joseph’s brothers 
responded, “The price will be ‘the enslavement of" the one in whose bag the 
cup is found. That is how we punish the wrongdoers.” 


Joseph Takes Benjamin 
76. Joseph began searching their bags before that of his brother Benjamin’, 
then brought it out of Benjamin’s bag. This is how We inspired Joseph to 


plan. He could not have taken his brother under the King’s law, but Allah 
had so willed. We elevate in rank whoever We will. But above those 
ranking in knowledge is the One All-Knowing. 77. "To distance 
themselves,’ Joseph’s brothers argued, “If he has stolen, so did his ‘full’ 
brother before.”!426! But Joseph suppressed his outrage—revealing nothing 
to them—and said ‘to himself’, “You are in such an evil position, |452! and 
Allah knows best "the truth of’ what you claim.” 78. They appealed, “O 
Chief Minister! He has a very old father, so take one of us instead. We 
surely see you as one of the good-doers.” 79. Joseph responded, “Allah 
forbid that we should take other than the one with whom we found our 
property. Otherwise, we would surely be unjust.” 


Bad News for Jacob, Again 

80. When they lost all hope in him, they spoke privately. The eldest of them 
said, “Do you not know that your father had taken a solemn oath by Allah 
from you, nor how you failed him regarding Joseph before? So I am not 
leaving this land until my father allows me to, or Allah decides for me. For 
He is the Best of Judges. 81. Return to your father and say, ‘O our father! 
Your son committed theft. We testify only to what we know. We could not 
guard against the unforeseen.!458! 82. Ask ‘the people of" the land where we 
were and the caravan we travelled with. We are certainly telling the truth.’” 


Jacob’s Grief 

83. He cried, “No! Your souls must have tempted you to do something 
evil’. So "I am left with nothing but" beautiful patience!!492! I trust Allah 
will return them all to me. Surely He ‘alone’ is the All-Knowing, All-Wise.” 
84. He turned away from them, lamenting, “Alas, poor Joseph!” And his 
eyes turned white out of the grief he suppressed.'4®2! 85. They said, “By 
Allah! You will not cease to remember Joseph until you lose your health or 
"even your life.” 86. He replied, “I complain of my anguish and sorrow 
only to Allah, and I know from Allah what you do not know. 87. O my 
sons! Go and search ‘diligently’ for Joseph and his brother. And do not lose 
hope in the mercy of Allah, for no one loses hope in Allah’s mercy except 
those with no faith.” 


Joseph Reveals His Identity 


88. When they entered Joseph’s presence, they pleaded, “O Chief Minister! 
We and our family have been touched with hardship, and we have brought 
only a few worthless coins, but "please’ give us our supplies in full and be 
charitable to us. Indeed, Allah rewards the charitable.” 89. He asked, “Do 
you remember what you did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance?” 
90. They replied ‘in shock’, “Are you really Joseph?” He said, “I am 
Joseph, and here is my brother "Benjamin"! Allah has truly been gracious to 
us. Surely whoever is mindful ‘of Allah" and patient, then certainly Allah 
never discounts the reward of the good-doers.” 


Brothers’ Apology Accepted 
91. They admitted, “By Allah! Allah has truly preferred you over us, and 
we have surely been sinful.” 92. Joseph said, “There is no blame on you 
today. May Allah forgive you! He is the Most Merciful of the merciful! 93. 
Go with this shirt of mine and cast it over my father’s face, and he will 
regain his sight. Then come back to me with your whole family.” 


Jacob Regains His Sight 

94. When the caravan departed ‘from Egypt’, their father said "to those 
around him’, “You may think I am senile, but I certainly sense the smell of 
Joseph.” 95. They replied, “By Allah! You are definitely still in your old 
delusion.” 96. But when the bearer of the good news arrived, he cast the 
shirt over Jacob’s face, so he regained his sight. Jacob then said ‘to his 
children’, “Did I not tell you that I truly know from Allah what you do not 
know?” 97. They begged, “O our father! Pray for the forgiveness of our 
sins. We have certainly been sinful.” 98. He said, “I will pray to my Lord 
for your forgiveness.'4©!! He ‘alone’ is indeed the All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful.” 


Joseph’s Dream Comes True 
99. When they entered Joseph’s presence, he received his parents 
graciously’ and said, “Enter Egypt, Allah willing, in security.” 100. Then 
he raised his parents to the throne, and they all fell down in prostration to 
Joseph,'4£2! who then said, “O my dear father! This is the interpretation of 
my old dream. My Lord has made it come true. He was truly kind to me 
when He freed me from prison, and brought you all from the desert after 
Satan had ignited rivalry between me and my siblings.'4°2! Indeed my Lord 


is subtle in fulfilling what He wills. Surely He ‘alone’ is the All-Knowing, 
All-Wise.” 


Joseph’s Prayer 
101. “My Lord! You have surely granted me authority and taught me the 
interpretation of dreams. "O` Originator of the heavens and the earth! You 
are my Guardian in this world and the Hereafter. Allow me to die as one 
who submits!464! and join me with the righteous.” 


Reminders to Prophet Muhammad 

102. That is from the stories of the unseen which We reveal to you "O 
Prophet’. You were not present when they ‘all™465! made up their minds, 
and when they plotted ‘against Joseph’. 103. And most people will not 
believe—no matter how keen you are— 104. even though you are not 
asking them for a reward for this “Quran”. It is only a reminder to the whole 
world. 105. How many signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by 
with indifference! 106. And most of them do not believe in Allah without 
associating others with Him ‘in worship’. 107. Do they feel secure that an 
overwhelming torment from Allah will not overtake them, or that the Hour 
will not take them by surprise when they least expect ‘it’? 


Invitation with Knowledge and Wisdom 
108. Say, "O Prophet,’ “This is my way. I invite to Allah with insight—I and 
those who follow me. Glory be to Allah, and I am not one of the 
polytheists.” 


Allah’s Messengers 

109. We only sent before you "O Prophet’ men inspired by Us from among 
the people of each society. Have the deniers not travelled through the land 
to see what was the end of those ‘destroyed’ before them? And surely the 
eternal’ Home of the Hereafter is far better for those mindful ‘of Allah’. 
Will you not then understand? 110. And when the messengers despaired and 
their people thought the messengers had been denied help, Our help came to 
them ‘at last’. We then saved whoever We willed, and Our punishment is 
never averted from the wicked people. 


Messengers’ Stories in the Quran 
111. In their stories there is truly a lesson for people of reason. This 
message cannot be a fabrication, rather ‘it is’ a confirmation of previous 


revelation, a detailed explanation of all things, a guide, and a mercy for 
people of faith. 
kkk 


13. Thunder 
(Ar-Ra’d) 


This sûrah, which takes its name from the thunder in verse 13, elaborates 
upon the last verses of the previous sûrah (starting with 105) relating to 
Allah’s magnificent signs in the heavens and earth which are met with 
neglect by the deniers; Allah’s knowledge, might, and unwavering support 
for His prophets; the authenticity of the Quran; and warnings to the 
disbelievers. The sûrah touches on the qualities of the believers and the 
disbelievers and the reward for each. All these themes are reiterated in the 
next two sirahs. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Truth 
1. Alif-LaGm-Mim-Ra. These are the verses of the Book. What has been 
revealed to you "O Prophet’ from your Lord is the truth, but most people do 
not believe. 


Allah’s Might 

2. It is Allah Who has raised the heavens without pillars—as you can see— 
then established Himself on the Throne. He has subjected the sun and the 
moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. He conducts the whole affair. 
He makes the signs clear so that you may be certain of the meeting with 
your Lord. 3. And He is the One Who spread out the earth and placed firm 
mountains and rivers upon it, and created fruits of every kind in pairs.!4®! 
He covers the day with night. Surely in this are signs for those who reflect. 
4. And on the earth there are ‘different’ neighbouring tracts, gardens of 
grapevines, ‘various’ crops, palm trees—some stemming from the same 
root, others standing alone. They are all irrigated with the same water, yet 
We make some taste better than others. Surely in this are signs for those 
who understand. 


Denying Resurrection 
5. ‘Now,’ if anything should amaze you "O Prophet’, then it is their 
question: “When we are reduced to dust, will we really be raised as a new 


creation?” It is they who have disbelieved in their Lord. It is they who will 
have shackles around their necks. And it is they who will be the residents of 
the Fire. They will be there forever. 


Hastening the Torment 
6. They ask you "O Prophet’ to hasten the torment rather than grace, though 
there have ‘already’ been "many' torments before them. Surely your Lord is 
full of forgiveness for people, despite their wrongdoing, and your Lord is 
truly severe in punishment. 


Demanding a Sign from the Prophet!48Z! 
7. The disbelievers say, “If only a sign could be sent down to him from his 
Lord.” You "O Prophet’ are only a warner. And every people had a guide. 


Allah’s Knowledge 
8. Allah knows what every female bears and what increases and decreases 
in the wombs.!468! And with Him everything is determined with precision. 
9. "He is the’ Knower of the seen and the unseen—the All-Great, Most 
Exalted. 10. It is the same "to Him’ whether any of you speaks secretly or 
openly, whether one hides in the darkness of night or goes about in broad 
daylight. 
Allah’s Power 
11. For each one there are successive angels before and behind, protecting 
them by Allah’s command. Indeed, Allah would never change a people’s 
state "of favour’ until they change their own state ‘of faith’. And if it is 
Allah’s Will to torment a people, it can never be averted, nor can they find a 
protector other than Him. 
Display of Divine Power 
12. He is the One Who shows you lightning, inspiring "you with’ hope and 
fear,'42! and produces heavy clouds. 13. The thunder glorifies His praises, 
as do the angels in awe of Him. He sends thunderbolts, striking with them 
whoever He wills. Yet they dispute about Allah. And He is tremendous in 
might. 


Useless Idols 
14, Calling upon Him ‘alone’ is the truth. But those ‘idols’ the pagans 
invoke besides Him ‘can never respond to them in any way. ‘It is’ just like 


someone who stretches out their hands to water, ‘asking it’ to reach their 
mouths, but it can never do so. The calls of the disbelievers are only in vain. 


The True Lord 
15. To Allah ‘alone’ bow down ‘in submission all those in the heavens 
and the earth—willingly or unwillingly—as do their shadows, morning and 
evening. 


[470] 


Almighty Allah or Powerless Gods? 

16. Ask "them, O Prophet’, “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” 
Say, “Allah!” Ask ‘them’, “Why ‘then’ have you taken besides Him lords 
who cannot even benefit or protect themselves?” Say, “Can the blind and 
the sighted be equal? Or can darkness and light be equal?”!42"! Or have they 
associated with Allah partners who ‘supposedly" produced a creation like 
His, leaving them confused between the two creations? Say, “Allah is the 
Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Supreme.” 


Parable of Truth and Falsehood 
17. He sends down rain from the sky, causing the valleys to flow, each 
according to its capacity. The currents then carry along rising foam, similar 
to the slag produced from metal that people melt in the fire for ornaments or 
tools. This is how Allah compares truth to falsehood. The ‘worthless’ 
residue is then cast away, but what benefits people remains on the earth. 
This is how Allah sets forth parables. 


Blindness to the Truth 

18. Those who respond to ‘the call of’ their Lord will have the finest 
reward. As for those who do not respond to Him, even if they were to 
possess everything in the world twice over, they would certainly offer it to 
ransom themselves. They will face strict judgment, and Hell will be their 
home. What an evil place to rest! 19. Can the one who knows that your 
Lord’s revelation to you "O Prophet’ is the truth be like the one who is 
blind? None will be mindful ‘of this’ except people of reason. 


People of Reason 
20. ‘They are’ those who honour Allah’s covenant, never breaking the 
pledge; 21. and those who maintain whatever ‘ties’ Allah has ordered to be 
maintained, stand in awe of their Lord, and fear strict judgment. 22. And 
"they are’ those who endure patiently, seeking their Lord’s pleasure,|422! 


establish prayer, donate from what We have provided for them—secretly 
and openly—and respond to evil with good. It is they who will have the 
ultimate abode: 23. the Gardens of Eternity, which they will enter along 
with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and descendants. And the 
angels will enter upon them from every gate, ‘saying,’ 24. “Peace be upon 
you for your perseverance. How excellent is the ultimate abode!” 


The Wicked 
25. And those who violate Allah’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break 
whatever ‘ties’ Allah has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in 


the land—it is they who will be condemned and will have the worst abode. 
[473] 


Worldly Delusions 
26. Allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills. And 
the disbelievers become prideful of ‘the pleasures of' this worldly life. But 
the life of this world, compared to the Hereafter, is nothing but a fleeting 
enjoyment. 


Remembrance of Allah 
27. The disbelievers say, “If only a sign could be sent down to him from his 
Lord.” 1474 Say, "O Prophet,’ “Indeed, Allah leaves to stray whoever He 
wills, and guides to Himself whoever turns to Him— 28. those who believe 
and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of Allah. Surely in the 
remembrance of Allah do hearts find comfort. 29. Those who believe and 
do good, for them will be bliss and an honourable destination.” 


Denying the Most Compassionate 
30. And so We have sent you "O Prophet’ to a community, like "We did 
with’ earlier communities, so that you may recite to them what We have 
revealed to you. Yet they deny the Most Compassionate.'425! Say, “He is my 
Lord! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. In Him I put my 


1°99 


trust, and to Him I tum ‘in repentance’. 


Deniers Will Always Deny 
31. If there were a recitation that could cause mountains to move, or the 
earth to split, or the dead to speak, “it would have been this Quran’. But all 
matters are by Allah’s Will. Have the believers not yet realized that had 
Allah willed, He could have guided all of humanity? And disasters will 


continue to afflict the disbelievers or strike close to their homes for their 
misdeeds, until Allah’s promise comes to pass. Surely Allah never fails in 
His promise. 32. Other messengers had already been ridiculed before you, 
but I delayed the disbelievers ‘for a while’ then seized them. And how 
“horrible’ was My punishment! 


Falsehood Made Appealing 

33. Is ‘there any equal to’ the Vigilant One Who knows what every soul 
commits? Yet the pagans have associated others with Allah ‘in worship’. 
Say, "O Prophet,’ “Name them! Or do you ‘mean to’ inform Him of 
something He does not know on the earth? Or are these ‘gods’ just empty 
words?” In fact, the disbelievers’ falsehood has been made so appealing to 
them that they have been turned away from the Path. And whoever Allah 
leaves to stray will be left with no guide. 34. For them is punishment in this 
worldly life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is truly far worse. And 
none can shield them from Allah. 


Paradise Described 
35. The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that under it 
rivers flow; eternal is its fruit as well as its shade. That is the ‘ultimate’ 
outcome for the righteous. But the outcome for the disbelievers is the Fire! 


Embracing the Quran 

36. "The believers among’ those who were given the Scripture rejoice at 
what has been revealed to you "O Prophet’, while some ‘disbelieving’ 
factions deny a portion of it. Say, “I have only been commanded to worship 
Allah, associating none with Him ‘in worship’. To Him I invite ‘all’, and to 
Him is my return.” 37. And so We have revealed it as an authority in 
Arabic. And if you were to follow their desires after ‘all’ the knowledge that 
has come to you, there would be none to protect or shield you from Allah. 


The Last of Many 
38. We have certainly sent messengers before you "O Prophet’ and blessed 
them with wives and offspring. It was not for any messenger to bring a sign 
without Allah’s permission. Every destined matter has a ‘set’ time. 39. 
Allah eliminates and confirms what He wills, and with Him is the Master 
Record.!4251 


Deliver, Not Judge 


40. Whether We show you "O Prophet’ some of what We threaten them 
with, or cause you to die ‘before that’, your duty is only to deliver ‘the 
message’. Judgment is for Us. 


Warning to the Pagans 
41. Do they not see that We gradually reduce their land from its borders? 
Allah decides—none can reverse His decision. And He is swift in 
reckoning. 42. Those ‘disbelievers’ before them ‘secretly’ planned, but 
Allah has the ultimate plan. He knows what every soul commits. And the 
disbelievers will soon know who will have the ultimate outcome. 43. The 
disbelievers say, “You ‘Muhammad’ are no messenger.” Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Allah is sufficient as a Witness between me and you, as is whoever has 
knowledge of the Scripture.” 
kk 


14, Abraham 
(Ibrahim) 
wise 

This Meccan sirah is named after Prophet Abraham ( .{z-[;) who, upon 
settling his wife Hagar and his son Ishmael in what lator’ Ane the city of 
Mecca, invokes Allah to protect his descendants from idol-worship, a 
practice that Meccans were entrenched in at the time of this revelation 
(verses 35-41). The sûrah also refers to some of Allah’s favours, which are 
met with ingratitude and denial. A sizable portion reveals how the 
disbelievers will be let down by Satan and tormented in Hell, wishing they 
had believed, according to the next sûrah (15:2). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to the Disbelievers 

1. Alif-Lam-Ra. "This is‘ a Book which We have revealed to you "O 
Prophet’ so that you may lead people out of darkness and into light, by the 
Will of their Lord, to the Path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy— 2. Allah, 
to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. 
And woe to the disbelievers because of a severe torment! 3. “They are’ the 
ones who favour the life of this world over the Hereafter and hinder ‘others’ 
from the Way of Allah, striving to make it ‘appear’ crooked. It is they who 
have gone far astray. 


Delivering the Message 
4. We have not sent a messenger except in the language of his people to 
clarify ‘the message’ for them. Then Allah leaves whoever He wills to stray 
and guides whoever He wills. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 


Prophet Moses 
5. Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs, ‘ordering him,’ “Lead your 
people out of darkness and into light, and remind them of Allah’s days ‘of 
favour.” Surely in this are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful. 6. 
“Consider’ when Moses said to his people, “Remember Allah’s favour upon 
you when He rescued you from the people of Pharaoh, who afflicted you 
with dreadful torment—slaughtering your sons and keeping your women. 


That was a severe test from your Lord. 7. And ‘remember’ when your Lord 
proclaimed, ‘If you are grateful, I will certainly give you more. But if you 
are ungrateful, surely My punishment is severe.’” 8. Moses added, “If you 
along with everyone on earth were to be ungrateful, then ‘know that’ Allah 
is indeed Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.” 


Warning to the Pagans of Mecca 
9. Have you not ‘already’ received the stories of those who were before 
you: the people of Noah, ’ Âd, Thamiid, and those after them? Only Allah 
knows how many they were. Their messengers came to them with clear 
proofs, but they put their hands over their mouths!4Z2! and said, “We totally 
reject what you have been sent with, and we are certainly in alarming doubt 
about what you are inviting us to.” 


Disbelievers’ Arguments 

10. Their messengers asked ‘them’, “Is there any doubt about Allah, the 
Originator of the heavens and the earth? He is inviting you in order to 
forgive your sins, and delay your end until your appointed term.”!428! They 
argued, “You are no more than humans like us! You ‘only’ wish to turn us 
away from what our forefathers worshipped. So bring us some compelling 
proof.” 11. Their messengers said to them, “We are ‘indeed’ only humans 
like you, but Allah favours whoever He chooses of His servants. It is not for 
us to bring you any proof without Allah’s permission. And in Allah let the 
believers put their trust. 12. Why should we not put our trust in Allah, when 
He has truly guided us to "the very best of’ ways? Indeed, we will patiently 
endure whatever harm you may cause us. And in Allah let the faithful put 
their trust.” 


Disbelievers’ Fate 
13. The disbelievers then threatened their messengers, “We will certainly 
expel you from our land, unless you return to our faith.” So their Lord 
revealed to them, “We will surely destroy the wrongdoers, 14. and make 
you reside in the land after them. This is for whoever is in awe of standing 
before Me and fears My warning.” 15. And both sides called for judgment, 
so every stubborn tyrant was doomed. 16. Awaiting them is Hell, and they 
will be left to drink oozing pus, 17. which they will sip with difficulty, and 


can hardly swallow. Death will overwhelm them from every side, yet they 
will not "be able to’ die. Awaiting them still is harsher torment. 


Wasted Deeds 
18. The parable of the deeds of those who disbelieve in their Lord is that of 
ashes fiercely blown away by wind on a stormy day. They will gain nothing 
from what they have earned. That is ‘truly’ the farthest one can stray. 


A Reminder to Humanity 
19. Have you not seen that Allah created the heavens and the earth for a 
reason? If He wills, He can eliminate you and produce a new creation. 20. 
And that is not difficult for Allah ‘at all’. 


Disbelievers Disowning Each Other 
21. They will all appear before Allah, and the lowly ‘followers’ will appeal 
to the arrogant ‘leaders’, “We were your ‘dedicated’ followers, so will you 
‘then’ protect us from Allah’s torment in any way?” They will reply, “Had 
Allah guided us, we would have guided you. "Now’' it is all the same for us 
whether we suffer patiently or impatiently, there is no escape for us.” 


Satan’s Talk!429! 
22. And Satan will say ‘to his followers’ after the judgment has been 
passed, “Indeed, Allah has made you a true promise. I too made you a 
promise, but I failed you. I did not have any authority over you. I only 
called you, and you responded to me. So do not blame me; blame 
yourselves. I cannot save you, nor can you save me. Indeed, I denounce 
your previous association of me with Allah ‘in loyalty’. Surely the 
wrongdoers will suffer a painful punishment.” 


Reward of the Believers 
23. Those who believe and do good will be admitted into Gardens, under 
which rivers flow—to stay there forever by the Will of their Lord—where 
they will be greeted with “Peace!” 


Parable of Good and Evil Words 
24. Do you not see how Allah compares a good word to a good tree? Its 
root is firm and its branches reach the sky, 25. ‘always’ yielding its fruit in 
every season by the Will of its Lord. This is how Allah sets forth parables 
for the people, so perhaps they will be mindful. 26. And the parable of an 
evil word is that of an evil tree, uprooted from the earth, having no stability. 


The Firm Word 
27. Allah makes the believers steadfast with the firm Word ‘of faith™4®2! in 
this worldly life and the Hereafter. And Allah leaves the wrongdoers to 
stray. For Allah does what He wills. 


Reward of the Ungrateful 
28. Have you not seen those ‘disbelievers' who meet Allah’s favours with 
ingratitude and lead their own people to their doom? 29. In Hell they will 
burn. What an evil place for settlement. 30. They set up equals to Allah to 
mislead ‘others’ from His Way. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Enjoy yourselves! Surely 
your destination is the Fire.” 


Order to the Prophet 
31. Tell My believing servants to establish prayer and donate from what We 
have provided for them—openly and secretly—before the arrival of a Day 
in which there will be no ransom or friendly connections. 


Allah’s Favours 

32. It is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth and sends down rain 
from the sky, causing fruits to grow as a provision for you. He has subjected 
the ships for your service, sailing through the sea by His command, and has 
subjected the rivers for you. 33. He has ‘also’ subjected for you the sun and 
the moon, both constantly orbiting, and has subjected the day and night for 
you. 34. And He has granted you all that you asked Him for. If you tried to 
count Allah’s blessings, you would never be able to number them. Indeed 
humankind is truly unfair, "totally" ungrateful.'481! 


Abraham's Prayers 
35. "Remember’ when Abraham prayed, “My Lord! Make this city ‘of 
Mecca’ secure, and keep me and my children away from the worship of 
idols. 36. My Lord! They have caused many people to go astray. So 
whoever follows me is with me, and whoever disobeys me—then surely 
You are ‘still’ All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 37. Our Lord! I have settled 
some of my offspring in a barren valley, near Your Sacred House, our Lord, 
so that they may establish prayer. So make the hearts of "believing’ people 
incline towards them and provide them with fruits, so perhaps they will be 
thankful. 38. Our Lord! You certainly know what we conceal and what we 
reveal. Nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from Allah. 39. All praise is 


for Allah who has blessed me with Ishmael and Isaac in my old age. My 
Lord is indeed the Hearer of ‘all’ prayers. 40. My Lord! Make me and those 
believers’ of my descendants keep up prayer. Our Lord! Accept my 
prayers. 41. Our Lord! Forgive me, my parents, and the believers on the 
Day when the judgment will come to pass.” 


Warning to the Wicked 

42. Do not think "O Prophet’ that Allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers 
do. He only delays them until a Day when ‘their’ eyes will stare in horror— 
43. rushing forth, heads raised, never blinking, hearts void. 44. And warn 
the people of the Day when the punishment will overtake ‘the wicked 
among’ them, and the wrongdoers will cry, “Our Lord! Delay us for a little 
while. We will respond to Your call and follow the messengers!” "It will be 
said,’ “Did you not swear before that you would never be removed ‘to the 
next life’?” 45. You passed by the ruins of those ‘destroyed peoples’ who 
had wronged themselves.'482! It was made clear to you how We dealt with 
them, and We gave you ‘many’ examples. 46. They devised every plot, 
which was fully known to Allah, but their plotting was not enough to ‘even’ 
overpower mountains ‘let alone Allah’. 


Reward of the Wicked 

47. So do not think "O Prophet’ that Allah will fail to keep His promise to 
His messengers. Allah is indeed Almighty, capable of punishment. 48. 
"Watch for’ the Day ‘when’ the earth will be changed into a different earth 
and the heavens as well, and all will appear before Allah—the One, the 
Supreme. 49. On that Day you will see the wicked bound together in chains, 
50. with garments of tar, and their faces covered with flames. 51. As such, 
Allah will reward every soul for what it has committed. Surely Allah is 
swift in reckoning. 


A Universal Message 
52. This ‘Quran’ is a ‘sufficient’ message for humanity so that they may 
take it as a warning and know that there is only One God, and so that people 
of reason may be mindful. 
kkk 


15. The Stone Valley 
(AI- Hijr) 


This Meccan surah takes its name from the place mentioned in 80-84, where 

the people of Salih once lived. Other destroyed peoples are mentioned as a 

warning to the Arab deniers, who are also warned at the beginning of the 

next surah. Satan’s arrogance towards Allah and enmity towards humanity 

are emphasized. The Prophet ( .- +f) is urged to exercise patience and 
r A B A 

seek comfort in worship. f 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to the Disbelievers 
1. Alif-Lãm-Ra. These are the verses of the Book; the clear Quran. 2. "The 
day will come when’ the disbelievers will certainly wish they had submitted 
"to Allah’.!483! 3. "So" let them eat and enjoy themselves and be diverted by 
‘false’ hope, for they will soon know. 4. We have never destroyed a society 
without a destined term. 5. No people can advance their doom, nor can they 
delay it. 


The Pagans Mocking the Prophet 
6. They say, “O you to whom the Reminder'4®! is revealed! You must be 
insane! 7. Why do you not bring us the angels, if what you say is true?” 8. 
We do not send the angels down except for a just cause, and then ‘the end 
of’ the disbelievers will not be delayed. 9. It is certainly We Who have 
revealed the Reminder, and it is certainly We Who will preserve it. 


Committed to Disbelief 

10. Indeed, We sent messengers before you "O Prophet’ among the groups 
of early peoples, 11. but no messenger ever came to them without being 
mocked. 12. This is how We allow disbelief "to steep’ into the hearts of the 
wicked. 13. They would not believe in this “Quran” despite the ‘many’ 
examples of those ‘destroyed’ before. 14. And even if We opened for them a 
gate to heaven, through which they continued to ascend, 15. still they would 
say, “Our eyes have truly been dazzled! In fact, we must have been 
bewitched.” 


Divine Power 

16. Indeed, We have placed constellations in the sky, and adorned it for all 
to see. 17. And We protected it from every accursed devil, 18. except the 
one eavesdropping, who is then pursued by a visible flare.'485! 19. As for 
the earth, We spread it out and placed upon it firm mountains, and caused 
everything to grow there in perfect balance. 20. And We made in it means 
of sustenance for you and others, who you do not provide for. 21. There is 
not any means ‘of sustenance’ whose reserves We do not hold, only 
bringing it forth in precise measure. 22. We send fertilizing winds, and 
bring down rain from the sky for you to drink. It is not you who hold its 
reserves. 23. Surely it is We Who give life and cause death. And We are the 
"Eternal” Successor.!485! 24, We certainly know those who have gone before 
you and those who will come after ‘you’. 25. Surely your Lord ‘alone’ will 
gather them together ‘for judgment’. He is truly All-Wise, All-Knowing. 


Creation of Adam 
26. Indeed, We created man from sounding clay moulded from black mud. 
27. As for the jinn, We created them earlier from smokeless fire. 28. 
“Remember, O Prophet’ when your Lord said to the angels, “I am going to 
create a human being from sounding clay moulded from black mud.!4871 29, 
So when I have fashioned him and had a spirit of My Own ‘creation’ 
breathed into him, fall down in prostration to him.” 


Satan’s Defiance 

30. So the angels prostrated all together— 31. but not Iblis,'“88! who refused 
to prostrate with the others. 32. Allah asked, “O Iblis! What is the matter 
with you that you did not join others in prostration?” 33. He replied, “It is 
not for me to prostrate to a human You created from sounding clay moulded 
from black mud.” 34. Allah commanded, “Then get out of Paradise, for you 
are truly cursed. 35. And surely upon you is condemnation until the Day of 
Judgment.” 


Satan’s Appeal 
36. Satan appealed, “My Lord! Then delay my end until the Day of their 
resurrection.” 37. Allah said, “You will be delayed 38. until the appointed 
Day.” 39. Satan responded, “My Lord! For allowing me to stray I will 
surely tempt them on earth and mislead them all together, 40. except Your 


chosen servants among them.” 41. Allah said, “This is the Way, binding on 
Me: 42. you will certainly have no authority over My servants, except the 
deviant who follow you, 43. and surely Hell is their destined place, all 
together. 44. It has seven gates, to each a group of them is designated.” 


The Righteous in Paradise 
45. Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and springs. 46. "It will be 
said to them,’ “Enter in peace and security.” 47. We will remove whatever 
bitterness they had in their hearts.'82! In a friendly manner, they will be on 
thrones, facing one another. 48. No fatigue will touch them there, nor will 
they ever be asked to leave. 


Allah’s Grace and Torment 
49. Inform My servants "O Prophet’ that I am truly the All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful, 50. and that My torment is indeed the most painful. 


Abraham Visited by Angels 

51. And inform them "O Prophet’ about Abraham’s guests 52. who entered 
upon him and greeted "him with’, “Peace!” He ‘later’ said, “Surely we are 
afraid of you.”!422! 53. They reassured "him’, “Do not be afraid! Surely we 
give you good news of a knowledgeable son.” 54. He wondered, “Do you 
give me good news despite my old age? What unlikely news!” 55. They 
responded, “We give you good news in all truth, so do not be one of those 
who despair.” 56. He exclaimed, “Who would despair of the mercy of their 
Lord except the misguided?” 57. He ‘then’ added, “What is your mission, O 
messenger-angels?” 58. They replied, “We have actually been sent to a 
wicked people. 59. As for the family of Lot, we will certainly deliver them 
all, 60. except his wife. We have determined that she will be one of the 
doomed.” 


Lot Visited by Angels 

61. So when the messengers came to the family of Lot, 62. he said, “You 
are surely an unfamiliar people!” 63. They responded, “We have come to 
you with that “torment’ which they have doubted. 64. We come to you with 
the truth, and we are certainly truthful. 65. So travel with your family in the 
dark of night, and follow ‘closely’ behind them. Do not let any of you look 
back, and go where you are commanded.” 66. We revealed to him this 
decree: “Those ‘sinners’ will be uprooted in the morning.” 


Destruction of the People of Lot 

67. And there came the men of the city, rejoicing. 68. Lot pleaded, “Indeed, 
these are my guests, so do not embarrass me. 69. Fear Allah and do not 
humiliate me.” 70. They responded, “Have we not forbidden you from 
protecting anyone?” 71. He said, “O my people! Here are my daughters!42!! 
"so marry them” if you wish to do so.” 72. By your life "O Prophet’,!422! 
they certainly wandered blindly, intoxicated "by lust’. 73. So the ‘mighty’ 
blast overtook them at sunrise. 74. And We turned the cities “of Sodom and 
Gomorrah’ upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay. 75. 
Surely in this are signs for those who contemplate. 76. Their ruins still lie 
along a known route. 77. Surely in this is a sign for those who believe. 


The People of Shu’aib 
78. And the residents of the Forest were truly wrongdoers, 79. so We 
inflicted punishment upon them. The ruins of both nations still lie on a 
well-known road. 


The People of Salih 
80. Indeed, the residents of the Stone Valley also denied the messengers. 
[493] 81. We gave them Our signs, but they turned away from them. 82. 
They carved their homes in the mountains, feeling secure. 83. But the 
‘mighty’ blast overtook them in the morning, 84. and all they achieved was 
of no help to them. 


Advice to the Prophet 

85. We have not created the heavens and the earth and everything in 
between except for a purpose. And the Hour is certain to come, so forgive 
graciously. 86. Surely your Lord is the Master Creator, All-Knowing. 87. 
We have certainly granted you the seven often-repeated verses!4“! and the 
great Quran. 88. Do not let your eyes crave the ‘fleeting’ pleasures We have 
provided for some of the disbelievers, nor grieve for them. And be gracious 
to the believers. 


More Advice to the Prophet 
89. And say, “I am truly sent with a clear warning?”— 90. ‘a warning’ 
similar to what We sent to those who divided ‘the Scriptures’, 91. who 
"now' accept parts of the Quran, rejecting others. 92. So by your Lord! We 
will certainly question them all 93. about what they used to do. 94. So 


proclaim what you have been commanded, and turn away from the 
polytheists. 95. Surely We will be sufficient for you against the mockers, 
96. who set up ‘other’ gods with Allah. They will soon come to know. 


Allah Is the Refuge 
97. We certainly know that your heart is truly distressed by what they say. 
98. So glorify the praises of your Lord and be one of those who ‘always’ 
pray, 99. and worship your Lord until the inevitable'422! comes your way. 
kkk 


16. Bees 
(An-Nahl) 


This Meccan sûrah, also known as the Chapter of Blessings (Sûratu An- 
Ni’am), takes its name from the bees mentioned in verses 68-69, which are 
described as one of Allah’s numerous favours to humanity. Instead of 
showing gratitude to Allah for all these blessings, the pagans wilfully set up 
idols, associating them with Allah in worship. They are also condemned for 
burying their daughters alive (verses 58-59). References are made to 
grateful believers and ungrateful dishighievers along with the ultimate 
reward for each group. Abraham ( .{z-{;) is cited close to the end of the 
surah as a grateful servant of Alloy tee example should be emul aga! by 
all believers. The stirah concludes by instructing the Prophet ( (712) to 
endure patiently and invite all to the Way of Allah with wisdom afid§race. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning of Judgment 
1. The command of Allah is at hand, so do not hasten it. Glorified and 
Exalted is He above what they associate ‘with Him in worship"! 


Allah’s Favours: 1) Divine Guidance 
2. He sends down the angels with revelation by His command to whoever 
He wills of His servants, "stating: “Warn ‘humanity’ that there is no god 
“worthy of worship’ except Me, so be mindful of Me ‘alone’.” 


Favour 2) The Heavens and Earth 
3. He created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. Exalted is He above 
what they associate with Him ‘in worship"! 


Favour 3) Creation of Humans 
4. He created humans from a sperm-drop, then—behold!—they openly 
challenge ‘Him’. 
Favour 4) Animals 
5. And He created the cattle for you as a source of warmth, food, and "many 
other’ benefits. 6. They are also pleasing to you when you bring them home 
and when you take them out to graze. 7. And they carry your loads to 


‘distant’ lands which you could not otherwise reach without great hardship. 
Surely your Lord is Ever Gracious, Most Merciful. 8. "He also created’ 
horses, mules, and donkeys for your transportation and adornment. And He 
creates what you do not know. 


Favour 5) The Way of Islam 
9. It is upon Allah ‘alone’ to ‘clearly’ show the Straight Way. Other ways 
are deviant. Had He willed, He would have easily imposed guidance upon 
all of you. 


Favour 6) Water 
10. He is the One Who sends down rain from the sky, from which you drink 
and by which plants grow for your cattle to graze. 11. With it He produces 
for you ‘various’ crops, olives, palm trees, grapevines, and every type of 
fruit. Surely in this is a sign for those who reflect. 


Favour 7) Celestial Events 
12. And He has subjected for your benefit the day and the night, the sun and 
the moon. And the stars have been subjected by His command. Surely in 
this are signs for those who understand. 


Favour 8) Other Creation 
13. And "He subjected’ for you whatever He has created on earth of varying 
colours.'426! Surely in this is a sign for those who are mindful. 


Favour 9) Seas 
14. And He is the One Who has subjected the sea, so from it you may eat 
tender seafood and extract ornaments to wear. And you see the ships 
ploughing their way through it, so you may seek His bounty and give 
thanks ‘to Him’. 


Favour 10) Natural Marvels 
15. He has placed into the earth firm mountains, so it does not shake with 
you, as well as rivers, and pathways so you may find your way. 16. Also by 
landmarks and stars do people find their way. 


Almighty Allah or Powerless Gods? 
17. Can the One Who creates be equal to those who do not? Will you not 
then be mindful? 18. If you tried to count Allah’s blessings, you would 
never be able to number them. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 


Merciful. 19. And Allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal. 20. 
But those ‘idols’ they invoke besides Allah cannot create anything—they 
themselves are created. 21. They are dead, not alive—not even knowing 
when their followers will be resurrected. 22. Your God is ‘only’ One God. 
As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, their hearts are in denial, 
and they are too proud. 23. Without a doubt, Allah knows what they conceal 
and what they reveal. He certainly does not like those who are too proud. 


Reward of the Wicked 

24. And when it is said to them, “What has your Lord revealed?” They say, 
“Ancient fables!” 25. Let them bear their burdens in full on the Day of 
Judgment as well as some of the burdens of those they mislead without 
knowledge. Evil indeed is what they will bear! 26. Indeed, those before 
them had plotted, but Allah struck at the 'very’ foundation of their structure, 
so the roof collapsed on top of them, and the torment came upon them from 
where they did not expect.'422! 27. Then on the Day of Judgment He will 
humiliate them and say, “Where are My ‘so-called’ associate-gods for 
whose sake you used to oppose ‘the believers’?” Those gifted with 
knowledge will say, “Surely disgrace and misery today are upon the 
disbelievers.” 28. Those whose souls the angels seize while they wrong 
themselves will then offer ‘full’ submission ‘and say falsely,’ “We did not 
do any evil.” "The angels will say,’ “No! Surely Allah fully knows what you 
used to do. 29. So enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever. Indeed, what 
an evil home for the arrogant!” 


Reward of the Righteous 

30. And ‘when’ it is said to those mindful ‘of Allah’, “What has your Lord 
revealed?” They say, “All the best!” For those who do good in this world, 
there is goodness. But far better is the ‘eternal’ Home of the Hereafter. How 
excellent indeed is the home of the righteous: 31. the Gardens of Eternity 
which they will enter, under which rivers flow. In it they will have whatever 
they desire. This is how Allah rewards the righteous— 32. those whose 
souls the angels take while they are virtuous, saying "to them’, “Peace be 
upon you! Enter Paradise for what you used to do.” 


Warning to Pagan Deniers 
33. Are they only awaiting the coming of the angels or the command of 
your Lord "O Prophet’? So were those before them. And Allah never 


wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves. 34. Then the evil 
“consequences” of their deeds overtook them, and they were overwhelmed 
by what they used to ridicule. 


False Argument 
35. The polytheists argue, “Had Allah willed, neither we nor our forefathers 
would have worshipped anything other than Him, nor prohibited anything 
without His command.” So did those before them. Is not the messengers’ 
duty only to deliver ‘the message’ clearly? 


Same Fate 
36. We surely sent a messenger to every community, saying, “Worship 
Allah and shun false gods.” But some of them were guided by Allah, while 
others were destined to stray. So travel throughout the land and see the fate 
of the deniers! 37. Even though you "O Prophet’ are keen on their guidance, 
Allah certainly does not guide those He leaves to stray, and they will have 
no helpers. 


The Resurrection 
38. They swear by Allah their most solemn oaths that Allah will never raise 
the dead to life. Yes ‘He will"! It is a true promise binding on Him, but most 
people do not know. 39. "He will do that’ to make clear to them what they 
disagreed on, and for the disbelievers to know that they were liars. 40. If 
We ever will something ‘to exist’, all We say is: “Be!” And it is! 


Reward of the Steadfast 
41. As for those who emigrated in ‘the cause of’ Allah after being 
persecuted, We will surely bless them with a good home in this world. But 
the reward of the Hereafter is far better, if only they knew. 42. ‘It is’ they 
who have patiently endured, and in their Lord they put their trust. 


Messengers Are Not Angels 
43. We did not send ‘messengers’ before you "O Prophet’ except mere men 
inspired by Us. If you ‘polytheists’ do not know ‘this already’, then ask 
those who have knowledge ‘of the Scriptures’. 44. "We sent them’ with clear 
proofs and divine Books. And We have sent down to you "O Prophet’ the 
Reminder, so that you may explain to people what has been revealed for 
them, and perhaps they will reflect. 


Warning to the Wicked 


45. Do those who devise evil plots feel secure that Allah will not cause the 
earth to swallow them? Or that the torment will not come upon them in 
ways they cannot comprehend? 46. Or that He will not seize them while 
they go about ‘their day’, for then they will have no escape? 47. Or that He 
will not destroy them gradually? But your Lord is truly Ever Gracious, 
Most Merciful. 


Everything Submits to Allah 

48. Have they not considered how the shadows of everything Allah has 
created incline to the right and the left "as the sun moves’, totally submitting 
to Allah in all humility? 49. And to Allah ‘alone’ bows down ‘in 
submission™428! whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of 
living creatures, as do the angels—who are not too proud ‘to do so’. 50. 
They!4221 fear their Lord above them, and do whatever they are 
commanded. 


One God Alone 
51. And Allah has said, “Do not take two gods. There is only One God. So 
be in awe of Me ‘alone’.” 52. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens 
and the earth, and to Him ‘alone’ is the everlasting devotion. Will you then 
fear any other than Allah? 


Ingratitude to Allah 
53. Whatever blessings you have are from Allah. Then whenever hardship 
touches you, to Him ‘alone’ you cry ‘for help’. 54. Then as soon as He 
removes the hardship from you, a group of you associates ‘others’ with their 
Lord ‘in worship’, 55. only returning Our favours with ingratitude. So enjoy 
yourselves, for you will soon know. 


Offerings to Idols 
56. And they ‘even’ assign to those ‘idols —who know nothing—a share of 
what We have provided for them. By Allah! You will certainly be 
questioned about whatever ‘lies’ you used to fabricate "against Allah’. 


Allah’s Daughters? 
57. And they attribute ‘angels as’ daughters to Allah—glory be to Him!— 
the opposite of what they desire for themselves. 58. Whenever one of them 
is given the good news of a baby girl, his face grows gloomy, as he 
suppresses his rage. 59. He hides himself from the people because of the 


bad news he has received. Should he keep her in disgrace, or bury her 
‘alive’ in the ground? Evil indeed is their judgment!!=2! 60. To those who 
disbelieve in the Hereafter belong all evil qualities, whereas to Allah belong 
the finest attributes. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 


Favour 11) Allowing Time for Repentance 
61. If Allah were to punish people ‘immediately’ for their wrongdoing, He 
would not have left a single living being on earth. But He delays them for 
an appointed term. And when their time arrives, they cannot delay it for a 
moment, nor could they advance it. 


Empty Hopes 
62. They attribute to Allah what they hate ‘for themselves’, and their 
tongues utter the lie that they will have the finest reward. Without a doubt, 
for them is the Fire, where they will be abandoned. 


Evil Communities 
63. By Allah! We have surely sent messengers to communities before you 
"O Prophet’, but Satan made their misdeeds appealing to them. So he is 
their patron today, and they will suffer a painful punishment. 64. We have 
revealed to you the Book only to clarify for them what they differed about, 
and as a guide and mercy for those who believe. 


Favour 12) Rain 
65. And Allah sends down rain from the sky, giving life to the earth after its 
death. Surely in this is a sign for those who listen. 


Favour 13) Cattle and Milk 
66. And there is certainly a lesson for you in cattle: We give you to drink of 
what is in their bellies, from between digested food and blood: pure milk, 
pleasant to drink.!2%] 67. And from the fruits of palm trees and grapevines 
you derive intoxicants!222! as well as wholesome provision. Surely in this is 
a sign for those who understand. 


Favour 14) Bees and Honey 
68. And your Lord inspired the bees: “Make ‘your’ homes in the mountains, 
the trees, and in what people construct, 69. and feed from ‘the flower of' 
any fruit ‘you please’ and follow the ways your Lord has made easy for 


you.” From their bellies comes forth liquid of varying colours, in which 
there is healing for people. Surely in this is a sign for those who reflect. 


Allah’s Power over Humans 
70. Allah has created you, and then causes you to die. And some of you are 
left to reach the most feeble stage of life so that they may know nothing 
after having known much. Indeed, Allah is All-Knowing, Most Capable. 


Favour 15) Provisions 
71. And Allah has favoured some of you over others in provision. But those 
who have been much favoured would not share their wealth with those 
"bondspeople” in their possession, making them their equals.'"4! Do they 
then deny Allah’s favours? 


Favour 16) Spouses and Offspring 
72. And Allah has made for you spouses of your own kind, and given you 
through your spouses children and grandchildren.'2°5! And He has granted 
you good, lawful provisions. Are they then faithful to falsehood and 
ungrateful for Allah’s favours? 


Parables for Powerless Gods and Almighty Allah 

73. Yet they worship besides Allah those “idols* who do not afford them any 
provision from the heavens and the earth, nor do they have the power to. 74. 
So do not set up equals to Allah, for Allah certainly knows and you do not 
know. 75. Allah sets forth a parable: a slave who lacks all means, compared 
to a ‘free’ man to whom We granted a good provision, of which he donates 
"freely," openly and secretly. Are they equal? Praise be to Allah. In fact, 
most of them do not know. 76. And Allah sets forth a parable of two men: 
one of them is dumb, incapable of anything. He is a burden on his master. 
Wherever he is sent, he brings no good. Can such a person be equal to the 
one who commands justice and is on the Straight Path?!226! 


Allah’s Knowledge and Might 
77. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs "the knowledge of’ the unseen in the heavens 
and the earth. Bringing about the Hour would only take the blink of an eye, 
or even less. Surely Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


Favour 17) Senses 
78. And Allah brought you out of the wombs of your mothers while you 
knew nothing, and gave you hearing, sight, and intellect so perhaps you 


would be thankful. 


Favour 18) Birds 
79. Have they not seen the birds glide in the open sky? None holds them up 
except Allah. Surely in this are signs for those who believe. 


Favour 19) Homes 
80. And Allah has made your homes a place to rest, and has given you tents 
from the hide of animals, light to handle when you travel and when you 
camp. And out of their wool, fur, and hair He has given you furnishings and 
goods for a while. 


Favour 20) Shelters 
81. And Allah has provided you shade out of what He created, and has 
given you shelter in the mountains. He has also provided you with clothes 
protecting you from the heat “and cold’, and armour shielding you in battle. 
This is how He perfects His favour upon you, so perhaps you will ‘fully’ 
submit ‘to Him’. 
Denying Allah’s Favours 

82. But if they turn away, then your duty "O Prophet’ is only to deliver ‘the 
message’ clearly. 83. They are aware of Allah’s favours, but still deny them. 
And most of them are ‘truly’ ungrateful. 


Fate of the Disbelievers 
84. ‘Consider, O Prophet,’ the Day We will call ‘a prophet as’ a witness 
from every faith-community. Then the disbelievers will neither be allowed 
to plead nor appease ‘their Lord’. 85. And when the wrongdoers face the 
punishment, it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be delayed ‘from 
it’. 86. And when the polytheists see their associate-gods, they will say, 
“Our Lord! These are our associate-gods that we used to invoke besides 
You.” Their gods will throw a rebuttal at them, ‘saying,’ “You are definitely 
liars.” 87. They will offer “full” submission to Allah on that Day, and 
whatever ‘gods’ they fabricated will fail them. 88. For those who disbelieve 
and hinder ‘others’ from the Way of Allah, We will add more punishment to 
their punishment for all the corruption they spread. 


Prophets Witness Against Disbelievers 
89. ‘Consider, O Prophet,’ the Day We will call against every faith- 
community a witness of their own. And We will call you to be a witness 


against these "people of yours’. We have revealed to you the Book as an 
explanation of all things, a guide, a mercy, and good news for those who 
“fully* submit. 


Allah’s Commands and Prohibitions 
90. Indeed, Allah commands justice, grace, as well as courtesy to close 
relatives. He forbids indecency, wickedness, and aggression. He instructs 
you so perhaps you will be mindful. 


Honouring Pledges 

91. Honour Allah’s covenant when you make a pledge, and do not break 
your oaths after confirming them, having made Allah your guarantor. 
Surely Allah knows all you do. 92. Do not be like the woman who 
“foolishly’ unravels her yarn after it is firmly spun, by taking your oaths as a 
means of deceiving one another in favour of a stronger group. Surely Allah 
tests you through this. And on the Day of Judgment He will certainly make 
your differences clear to you. 


Favour 21) Free Choice 
93. Had Allah willed, He could have easily made you one community ‘of 
believers’, but He leaves to stray whoever He wills and guides whoever He 
wills.!227! And you will certainly be questioned about what you used to do. 


Honouring Agreements 

94. And do not take your oaths as a means of deceiving one another or your 
feet will slip after they have been firm. Then you will taste the evil 
“consequences” of hindering ‘others’ from the Way of Allah, and you will 
suffer a tremendous punishment. 95. And do not trade Allah’s covenant for 
a fleeting gain. What is with Allah is certainly far better for you, if only you 
knew. 96. Whatever you have will end, but whatever Allah has is 
everlasting. And We will certainly reward the steadfast according to the best 
of their deeds. 


Reward of the Good-Doers 
97. Whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, We will 
surely bless them with a good life, and We will certainly reward them 
according to the best of their deeds. 


Advice to the Believers 


98. When you recite the Quran, seek refuge with Allah from Satan, the 
accursed. 99. He certainly has no authority over those who believe and put 
their trust in their Lord. 100. His authority is only over those who take him 
as a patron and who—under his influence—associate ‘others’ with Allah ‘in 
worship’. 


Who Is the Fabricator? 

101. When We replace a verse with another!2°8!—and Allah knows best 
what He reveals—they say, “You "Muhammad" are just a fabricator.” In 
fact, most of them do not know. 102. Say, “The holy spirit'222! has brought 
it down from your Lord with the truth to reassure the believers, and as a 
guide and good news for those who submit ‘to Allah’.” 103. And We surely 
know that they say, “No one is teaching him except a human.” But the man 
they refer to speaks a foreign tongue, whereas this ‘Quran’ is ‘in’ eloquent 
Arabic.!2!8! 104, Surely those who do not believe in Allah’s revelations will 
never be guided by Allah, and they will suffer a painful punishment. 105. 
No one fabricates lies except those who disbelieve in Allah’s revelations, 
and it is they who are the ‘true’ liars. 


Abandoning Faith 

106. Whoever disbelieves in Allah after their belief—not those who are 
forced while their hearts are firm in faith, H! but those who embrace 
disbelief wholeheartedly—they will be condemned by Allah and suffer a 
tremendous punishment. 107. This is because they prefer the life of this 
world over the Hereafter. Surely Allah never guides those who ‘choose to’ 
disbelieve. 108. They are the ones whose hearts, ears, and eyes are sealed 
by Allah, and it is they who are ‘truly’ heedless. 109. Without a doubt, they 
will be the losers in the Hereafter. 110. As for those who emigrated after 
being compelled ‘to renounce Islam’, then struggled "in Allah’s cause’, and 
persevered, your Lord "O Prophet’ is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful 
after all. 


Pay Day 
111. ‘Consider’ the Day ‘when’ every soul will come pleading for itself, and 
each will be paid in full for what it did, and none will be wronged. 


The Ungrateful People 


112. And Allah sets forth the example of a society which was safe and at 
ease, receiving its provision in abundance from all directions. But its people 
met Allah’s favours with ingratitude, so Allah made them taste the clutches 
of hunger and fear for their misdeeds. 113. A messenger of their own 
actually did come to them, but they denied him. So the torment overtook 
them while they persisted in wrongdoing. 


Lawful and Prohibited Foods 
114. So eat from the good, lawful things which Allah has provided for you, 
and be grateful for Allah’s favours, if you ‘truly’ worship Him ‘alone’. 115. 
He has only forbidden you ‘to eat’ carrion, blood, swine,'2!2! and what is 
slaughtered in the name of any other than Allah. But if someone is 
compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding immediate 
need—then surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Warning to the Polytheists 
116. Do not falsely declare with your tongues, “This is lawful, and that is 
unlawful,” ‘only’ fabricating lies against Allah. Indeed, those who fabricate 
lies against Allah will never succeed. 117. "It is only’ a brief enjoyment, 
then they will suffer a painful punishment. 


Prohibited Foods for Jews 
118. To the Jews, We have forbidden what We related to you before.!=13] We 
did not wrong them, but it was they who wronged themselves. 


Allah Accepts Repentance 
119. As for those who commit evil ignorantly ‘or recklessly’, then repent 
afterwards and mend their ways, then your Lord is surely All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful. 


Prophet Abraham 
120. Indeed, Abraham was a model of excellence: devoted to Allah, 
"perfectly’ upright—not a polytheist— 121. ‘utterly’ grateful for Allah’s 
favours. "So" He chose him and guided him to the Straight Path. 122. We 
blessed him with all goodness in this world,'24! and in the Hereafter he will 
certainly be among the righteous. 123. Then We revealed to you "O Prophet, 
saying’: “Follow the faith of Abraham, the upright, who was not one of the 
polytheists.” 124. "Honouring" the Sabbath was ordained only for those who 


disputed about Abraham.!'245! And surely your Lord will judge between 
them on the Day of Judgment regarding their disputes. 


Inviting to Islam 
125. Invite ‘all’ to the Way of your Lord with wisdom and kind advice, and 
only debate with them in the best manner. Surely your Lord ‘alone’ knows 
best who has strayed from His Way and who is ‘rightly’ guided. 


Grace Is Best 
126. If you retaliate, then let it be equivalent to what you have suffered. But 
if you patiently endure, it is certainly best for those who are patient. 127. Be 
patient "O Prophet’, for your patience is only with Allah’s help. Do not 
grieve over those ‘who disbelieve’, nor be distressed by their schemes. 128. 
Surely Allah is with those who shun evil and who do good deeds’. 
kkk 


17. The Night Journey 


(Al-Isra’) 
| wide 

Since Abraham ( .{z-[;) is praised in the last verses of the previous sûrah 
as gpl model me e world, this Meccan sûrah speaks of how the Prophet 
( - (a_z) is honoured in this world through the Night Journey from Mecca 
salem then to the aigis and back to Mecca—all in one night 
(verses 1 and 60). He (.{z-[/;) will also be honoured on the Day of 
Judgment through the sft of praise where he will make intercession 
(verse 79). The children of Israel are referred to passingly at the end of the 
previous sûrah, but more insights are given about them both at the 
beginning and the end of this stirah. The key to success in this life and 
salvation in the next is encapsulated in a set of divine commandments 
(verses 22-39), along with a warning against Satan and his whispers 
(verses 61-65). The sûrah is critical of the pagan arguments against 
resurrection and their ridiculous demands (verses 89-93). Criticism of 
attributing partners and children to Allah is carried over to the next strah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Journey from Mecca to Jerusalem 

1. Glory be to the One Who took His servant "Muhammad’ by night from 
the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque whose surroundings We have 
blessed, so that We may show him some of Our signs.!=!6! Indeed, He!2!Z! 
alone is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 2. And We gave Moses the Scripture 
and made it a guide for the Children of Israel, ‘stating:* “Do not take 
besides Me any other Trustee of Affairs, 3. ‘O° descendants of those We 
carried with Noah ‘in the Ark"! He was indeed a grateful servant.” 


Warning to the Israelites 
4. And We warned the Children of Israel in the Scripture, “You will 
certainly cause corruption in the land twice, and you will become extremely 
arrogant. 


The Two Corruptions 


5. “When the first of the two warnings would come to pass, We would send 
against you some of Our servants of great might, who would ravage your 
homes. This would be a warning fulfilled. 6. Then ‘after your repentance’ 
We would give you the upper hand over them and aid you with wealth and 
offspring, causing you to outnumber them. 7. If you act rightly, it is for your 
own good, but if you do wrong, it is to your own loss. And when the second 
warning would come to pass, your enemies would ‘be left to’ totally 
disgrace you and enter the Temple "of Jerusalem’ as they entered it the first 
time, and utterly destroy whatever would fall into their hands. 8. Perhaps 
your Lord will have mercy on you ‘if you repent’, but if you return ‘to sin’, 
We will return ‘to punishment’. And We have made Hell a ‘permanent’ 
confinement for the disbelievers.” 


The Message of the Quran 
9. Surely this Quran guides to what is most upright, and gives good news to 
the believers—who do good—that they will have a mighty reward. 10. And 
"it warns’ those who do not believe in the Hereafter ‘that* We have prepared 
for them a painful punishment. 


Prayers in Anger 
11. And humans ‘swiftly’ pray for evil!=!8! as they pray for good. For 
humankind is ever hasty. 


The Day and Night 
12. We made the day and night as two signs. So We made the sign of the 
night devoid of light, and We made the sign of the day ‘perfectly’ bright, so 
that you may seek the bounty of your Lord and know the number of years 
and calculation ‘of time’. And We have explained everything in detail. 


The Record of Deeds 

13. We have bound every human’s destiny to their neck.'2!2! And on the 
Day of Judgment We will bring forth to each person’ a record which they 
will find laid open. 14. "And it will be said,’ “Read your record. You ‘alone’ 
are sufficient this Day to take account of yourself.” 15. Whoever chooses to 
be guided, it is only for their own good. And whoever chooses to stray, it is 
only to their own loss. No soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of 
another. And We would never punish ‘a people’ until We have sent a 
messenger "to warn them’. 


Punishment of the Wicked 
16. Whenever We intend to destroy a society, We command its elite "to obey 
Allah" but they act rebelliously in it. So the decree ‘of punishment’ is 
justified, and We destroy it utterly. 17. Imagine’ how many peoples We 
have destroyed after Noah! And sufficient is your Lord as All-Aware and 
All-Seeing of the sins of His servants. 


This Life or the Next? 

18. Whoever desires this fleeting world ‘alone’, We hasten in it whatever 
We please to whoever We will; then We destine them for Hell, where they 
will burn, condemned and rejected. 19. But whoever desires the Hereafter 
and strives for it accordingly, and is a ‘true’ believer, it is they whose 
striving will be appreciated. 20. We provide both the former and the latter 
from the bounty of your Lord. And the bounty of your Lord can never be 
withheld. 21. See how We have favoured some over others ‘in this life’, but 
the Hereafter is certainly far greater in rank and in favour. 


Commandments: 1) Worship Allah Alone, 2) Honour Your Parents 

22. Do not set up any other god with Allah, or you will end up condemned, 
abandoned. 23. For your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him. 
And honour your parents. If one or both of them reach old age in your care, 
never say to them ‘even’ ‘ugh,’ nor yell at them. Rather, address them 
respectfully. 24. And be humble with them out of mercy, and pray, “My 
Lord! Be merciful to them as they raised me when I was young.” 25. Your 
Lord knows best what is within yourselves. If you are righteous, He is 
certainly All-Forgiving to those who ‘constantly’ turn to Him. 


3) Give, 4) Do Not Waste 
26. Give to close relatives their due, as well as the poor and ‘needy’ 
travellers. And do not spend wastefully. 27. Surely the wasteful are ‘like’ 
brothers to the devils. And the Devil is ever ungrateful to his Lord. 28. But 
if you must turn them down ‘because you lack the means to give—while 
hoping to receive your Lord’s bounty—then ‘at least’ give them a kind 
word. 


5) Spend Moderately 
29. Do not be so tight-fisted, for you will be blameworthy; nor so open- 
handed, for you will end up in poverty. 30. Surely your Lord gives abundant 


or limited provisions to whoever He wills. He is certainly All-Aware, All- 
Seeing of His servants. 

6) Treasure Your Children 
31. Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We provide for them and 
for you. Surely killing them is a heinous sin. 

7) Do Not Commit Adultery 
32. Do not go near adultery. It is truly a shameful deed and an evil way. 

8) Do Not Kill 
33. Do not take a “human” life—made sacred by Allah—except with ‘legal’ 
right.'529! If anyone is killed unjustly, We have given their heirs'®24! the 
authority, but do not let them exceed limits in retaliation,'°22! for they are 
already supported "by law’. 
9) Protect Orphans’ Wealth, 10) Honour Pledges 

34. Do not come near the wealth of the orphan—unless intending to 
enhance it—until they attain maturity. And honour ‘your’ pledges, for you 
will surely be accountable for them. 


11) Maintain Fairness 
35. Give in full when you measure, and weigh with an even balance. That is 
fairest and best in the end. 


12) Be Sure 
36. Do not follow what you have no ‘sure’ knowledge of. Indeed, all will be 
called to account for ‘their’ hearing, sight, and intellect. 


13) Be Humble 
37. And do not walk on the earth arrogantly. Surely you can neither crack 
the earth nor stretch to the height of the mountains. 


Compliance with the Commandments 
38. The violation of any of these ‘commandments’ is detestable to your 
Lord. 39. This is part of the wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you 
"O Prophet’. And do not set up any other god with Allah "O humanity’, or 
you will be cast into Hell, blameworthy, rejected. 


Rebuttal to a Pagan Claim 
40. Has your Lord favoured you ‘pagans’ with sons and taken angels as 
“His” daughters?!223! You are truly making an outrageous claim. 41. We 


have surely varied ‘the signs’ in this Quran so perhaps they may be mindful, 
but it only drives them farther away. 


Other Gods? 

42. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Had there been other gods besides Him—as they 
claim—then they would have certainly sought a way to ‘challenge’ the Lord 
of the Throne.” 43. Glorified and Highly Exalted is He above what they 
claim! 44. The seven heavens, the earth, and all those in them glorify Him. 
There is not a single thing that does not glorify His praises—but you 
‘simply’ cannot comprehend their glorification. He is indeed Most 
Forbearing, All-Forgiving. 


The Pagans Mock the Quran 
45. When you "O Prophet’ recite the Quran, We put a hidden barrier 
between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter. 46. We have 
cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable to comprehend it—and 
deafness in their ears. And when you mention your Lord alone in the Quran, 
they turn their backs in aversion. 47. We know best how they listen to your 
recitation and what they say privately—when the wrongdoers say, “You 
would only be following a bewitched man.” 48. See how they call you 
names "O Prophet"!!9#4! So they have gone so "far astray that they cannot 
find the "Right* Way. 
The Resurrection 
49. And they say ‘mockingly’, “When we are reduced to bones and ashes, 
will we really be raised as a new creation?” 50. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Yes, 
even if’ you become stones, or iron, 51. or whatever you think is harder to 
bring to life!” Then they will ask you’, “Who will bring us back ‘to life"?” 
Say, “The One Who created you the first time.” They will then shake their 
heads at you and ask, “When will that be?” Say, “Perhaps it is soon!” 52. 
On the Day He will call you, you will ‘instantly’ respond by praising Him, 
[525] thinking you had remained ‘in the world’ only for a little while. 
Advice to the Prophet 
53. Tell My ‘believing’ servants to say only what is best. Satan certainly 
seeks to sow discord among them. Satan is indeed a swom enemy to 
humankind. 


Invitation to the Disbelievers 


54. Your Lord knows you best. He may have mercy on you if He wills, or 
punish you if He wills. We have not sent you "O Prophet’ as a keeper over 
them. 55. Your Lord knows best all those in the heavens and the earth. And 
We have surely favoured some prophets above others, and to David We 
gave the Psalms.!526! 


Other Gods Besides Allah? 
56. Say, "O Prophet,” “Invoke those you claim "to be divine™222! besides 
Him—they do not have the power to undo harm from you or transfer it "to 
someone else’.” 57. "Even’ the closest ‘to Allah’ of those invoked would be 
seeking a way to their Lord, hoping for His mercy, and fearing His 
punishment. Indeed, your Lord’s torment is fearsome. 


Signs Always Denied 
58. There is not a ‘wicked’ society that We will not destroy or punish with a 
severe torment before the Day of Judgment. That is written in the Record. 
59. Nothing keeps Us from sending the ‘demanded’ signs except that they 
had ‘already’ been denied by earlier peoples. And We gave Thamid the she- 
camel as a clear sign, but they wrongfully rejected it.'528! We only send the 
signs as a warning. 


Signs as a Test 
60. And ‘remember, O Prophet’ when We told you, “Certainly your Lord 
encompasses the people.” And We have made what We brought you to 
see!525] as well as the cursed tree "mentioned" in the Quran!=2! only as a test 
for the people. We keep warning them, but it only increases them greatly in 
defiance. 


Satan’s Defiance 
61. And ‘remember’ when We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” 
so they all did—but not Iblis,'224) who protested, “Should I prostrate to the 
one You have created from mud?” 62. Adding, “Do you see this one you 
honoured above me? If you delay my end until the Day of Judgment, I will 
certainly take hold of his descendants, except for a few.” 63. Allah 
responded, “Be gone! Whoever of them follows you, Hell will surely be the 
reward for all of you—an ample reward. 64. And incite whoever you can of 
them with your voice, mobilize against them all your cavalry and infantry, 
manipulate them in their wealth and children, and make them promises.” 


But Satan promises them nothing but delusion. 65. "Allah added,’ “You will 
truly have no authority over My ‘faithful’ servants.” And sufficient is your 
Lord as a Guardian. 


Human Ingratitude 
66. It is your Lord Who steers the ships for you through the sea, so that you 
may seek His bounty. Surely He is ever Merciful to you. 67. When you are 
touched with hardship at sea, you ‘totally’ forget all ‘the gods’ you 
‘normally’ invoke, except Him. But when He delivers you ‘safely’ to shore, 
you turn away. Humankind is ever ungrateful. 


False Immunity 
68. Do you feel secure that He will not cause the land to swallow you up, or 
unleash upon you a storm of stones? Then you will find none to protect you. 
69. Or do you feel secure that He will not send you back to sea once again, 
and send upon you a violent storm, drowning you for your denial? Then 
you will find none to avenge you against Us. 


Allah’s Favours to Humanity 
70. Indeed, We have dignified the children of Adam, carried them on land 
and sea, granted them good and lawful provisions, and privileged them far 
above many of Our creatures. 


The Record of Deeds 
71. "Beware of' the Day We will summon every people with their leader. 
[332] So whoever will be given their record in their right hand will read it 
happily’ and will not be wronged ‘even by the width of’ the thread of a date 
stone. 72. But whoever is blind ‘to the truth’ in this world’ will be blind in 
the Hereafter, and even’ far more astray from the ‘Right’ Way. 


Temptation by Meccan Pagans 
73. They definitely "thought they’ were about to lure you away from what 
We have revealed to you "O Prophet’, hoping that you would attribute 
something else to Us falsely—and then they would have certainly taken you 
as a Close friend.'*23! 74. Had We not made you steadfast, you probably 
would have inclined to them a little, 75. and then We truly would have 
made you taste double ‘punishment’ both in this life and after death, and 
you would have found no helper against Us. 76. They were about to 
intimidate you to drive you out of the land ‘of Mecca’, but then they would 


not have survived after you ‘had left’ except for a little while. 77. "This has 
been’ Our way with the messengers We sent before you. And you will never 
find any change in Our way. 


Advice to the Prophet 

78. Observe the prayer from the decline of the sun until the darkness of the 
night and the dawn prayer, for certainly the dawn prayer is witnessed "by 
angels”.'9341 79, And rise at “the last” part of the night, offering additional 
prayers, so your Lord may raise you to a station of praise.'235! 80. And say, 
“My Lord! Grant me an honourable entrance and an honourable exit!=36! 
and give me a supporting authority from Yourself.” 81. And declare, “The 
truth has come and falsehood has vanished. Indeed, falsehood is bound to 
vanish.” 


The Quran as a Healing 
82. We send down the Quran as a healing and mercy for the believers, but it 
only increases the wrongdoers in loss. 


Arrogance and Ingratitude 
83. When We grant people Our favours, they turn away, acting arrogantly. 
But when touched with evil, they lose all hope. 84. Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Everyone acts in their own way. But your Lord knows best whose way is 
rightly guided.” 


Question by Pagans 
85. They ask you "O Prophet’ about the spirit. Say, “Its nature is known 
only to my Lord, and you "O humanity’ have been given but little 
knowledge.” 


The Quran as a Favour 
86. If We willed, We could have certainly taken away what We have 
revealed to you "O Prophet’—then you would find none to guarantee its 
return from Us— 87. had it not been for the mercy of your Lord. Indeed, 
His favour upon you is immense. 


The Quran Challenge 
88. Say, "O Prophet,’ “If ‘all’ humans and jinn were to come together to 
produce the equivalent of this Quran, they could not produce its equal, no 
matter how they supported each other.” 


Meaningless Demands 

89. And We have truly set forth every ‘kind of" lesson for humanity in this 
Quran, yet most people persist in disbelief. 90. They challenge ‘the 
Prophet’, “We will never believe in you until you cause a spring to gush 
forth from the earth for us, 91. or until you have a garden of palm trees and 
vineyards, and cause rivers to flow abundantly in it, 92. or cause the sky to 
fall upon us in pieces, as you have claimed, or bring Allah and the angels 
before us, face to face, 93. or until you have a house of gold, or you ascend 
into heaven—and even then we will not believe in your ascension until you 
bring down to us a book that we can read.” Say, “Glory be to my Lord! Am 
I not only a human messenger?” 


An Angelic Messenger? 
94. And nothing has prevented people from believing when guidance comes 
to them except their protest: “Has Allah sent a human as a messenger?” 95. 
Say, "O Prophet,’ “Had there been angels walking the earth, well settled, We 
would have surely sent down for them an angel from heaven as a 
messenger.” 96. Say, “Sufficient is Allah as a Witness between me and you. 
He is certainly All-Knowing, All-Seeing of His servants.” 


Reward of the Wicked 
97. Whoever Allah guides is truly guided. And whoever He leaves to stray, 
you will find no guardians for them besides Him. And We will drag them 
on their faces on the Day of Judgment—deaf, dumb, and blind. Hell will be 
their home. Whenever it dies down, We will flare it up for them. 98. That is 
their reward for rejecting Our signs and asking "mockingly’, “When we are 
reduced to bones and ashes, will we really be raised as a new creation?” 99. 
Have they not realized that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, 
can ‘easily’ re-create them? He has ‘already’ set for them a time, about 
which there is no doubt. But the wrongdoers persist in denial. 100. Say ‘to 
them, O Prophet’, “Even if you were to possess the ‘infinite’ treasuries of 
my Lord’s mercy, then you would certainly withhold ‘them’, fearing they 
would run out—for humankind is ever stingy!” 
Pharaoh Challenges Moses 

101. We surely gave Moses nine clear signs.'°24! "You, O Prophet, can” ask 
the Children of Israel. When Moses came to them, Pharaoh said to him, “I 
really think that you, O Moses, are bewitched.” 102. Moses replied, “You 


know well that none has sent these ‘signs’ down except the Lord of the 
heavens and the earth as insights. And I really think that you, O Pharaoh, 
are doomed.” 103. So Pharaoh wanted to scare the Israelites out of the land 
‘of Egypt’, but We drowned him and all of those with him. 104. And We 
said to the Children of Israel after Pharaoh, “Reside in the land, but when 
the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass,'°28! We will bring you all 
together.” 


The Noble Quran 

105. We have sent down the Quran in truth, and with the truth it has come 
down. We have sent you "O Prophet’ only as a deliverer of good news and a 
warner. 106. ‘It is’ a Quran We have revealed in stages so that you may 
recite it to people at a deliberate pace. And We have sent it down in 
successive revelations. 107. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Believe in this ‘Quran’, or 
do not. Indeed, when it is recited to those who were gifted with 
knowledge!=32! before it "was revealed’, they fall upon their faces in 
prostration, 108. and say, ‘Glory be to our Lord! Surely the promise of our 
Lord has been fulfilled.’ 109. And they fall down upon their faces weeping, 
and it increases them in humility.” 


Advice to the Prophet 
110. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Call upon Allah or call upon the Most 
Compassionate—whichever you call, He has the Most Beautiful Names.” 
Do not recite your prayers too loudly or silently, but seek a way between. 
111. And say, “All praise is for Allah, Who has never had ‘any’ offspring; 
[540] nor does He have a partner in “governing” the kingdom;'=" nor is He 
pathetic, needing a protector.!=42! And revere Him immensely.” 
kkk 


18. The Cave 
(Al-Kahf) 


This Meccan sirah takes its name from the story of the pegplg st the cave in 
verses 9-26. According to Ibn ’Abbds, the Prophet ( (712) was asked 
about the youths who hid in a cave, a king who dominae parts of the 
world, and about sng spirit, so 18:9-26, 18:83-99, and 17:85 were revealed. 
The Prophet (. z-le) says in an authentic narration collected by At- 
Tirmizi, “No A will move on Judgment Day until they are asked 
about four things: 1) What they did in their youth. 2) How they earned and 
spent their wealth. 3) What they did with their knowledge. 4) And how they 
spent their lives.” Interestingly, these four questions correspond to the four 
stories mentioned in this sûrah: 1) The story of the youths and the cave. 2) 
The story of the wealthy man with two gardens. 3) The story of Moses and 
the man of knowledge. 4) And finally the story of Zul-Qarnain and his life 
and travels in the service of Allah. The four stories are interjected by 
warnings to the disbelievers and good news to the believers. Like the story 
of the people of the cave, some miraculous stories appear in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Message of the Quran 

1. All praise is for Allah Who has revealed the Book to His servant,!242! 
allowing no crookedness in it, 2. "making it’ perfectly upright, to warn ‘the 
disbelievers’ of a severe torment from Him; to give good news to the 
believers—who do good—that they will have a fine reward, 3. in which 
they will remain forever; 4. and to warn those who claim, “Allah has 
offspring.” “4! 5, They have no knowledge of this, nor did their forefathers. 
What a terrible claim that comes out of their mouths! They say nothing but 
lies. 


Be Steadfast 
6. Now, perhaps you "O Prophet’ will grieve yourself to death over their 
denial, if they ‘continue to’ disbelieve in this message. 7. We have indeed 
made whatever is on earth as an adornment for it, in order to test which of 


them is best in deeds. 8. And We will certainly reduce whatever is on it to 
barren ground. 


Story 1) The People of the Cave 

9. Have you "O Prophet’ thought that the people of the cave and the 
plaque!=42! were "the only’ wonders of Our signs? 10. Remember’ when 
those youths took refuge in the cave, and said, “Our Lord! Grant us mercy 
from Yourself and guide us rightly through our ordeal.” 11. So We caused 
them to fall into a dead sleep'*“6! in the cave for many years, 12. then We 
raised them so We may show which of the two groups would make a better 
estimation of the length of their stay.'242! 


Standing up for the Truth 

13. We relate to you "O Prophet’ their story in truth. They were youths who 
truly believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance. 14. And 
We strengthened their hearts when they stood up and declared, “Our Lord is 
the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We will never call upon any god 
besides Him, or we would truly be uttering an outrageous lie.” 15. "Then 
they said to one another,’ “These people of ours have taken gods besides 
Him. Why do they not produce a clear proof of them? Who then does more 
wrong than those who fabricate lies against Allah? 16. Since you have 
distanced yourselves from them and what they worship besides Allah, take 
refuge in the cave. Your Lord will extend His mercy to you and 
accommodate you in your ordeal.” 


In the Cave 

17. And you would have seen the sun, as it rose, inclining away from their 
cave to the right, and as it set, declining away from them to the left, while 
they lay in its open space.'*48! That is one of the signs of Allah. Whoever 
Allah guides is truly guided. But whoever He leaves to stray, you will never 
find for them a guiding mentor. 18. And you would have thought they were 
awake, '=49! though they were asleep. We turned them over, to the right and 
left, while their dog stretched his forelegs at the entrance. Had you looked 
at them, you would have certainly fled away from them, filled with horror. 


The Youths Are Awakened 
19. And so We awakened them so that they might question one another. 
One of them exclaimed, “How long have you remained ‘asleep’?” Some 


replied, “Perhaps a day, or part of a day.” They said ‘to one another’, “Your 
Lord knows best how long you have remained. So send one of you with 
these silver coins of yours to the city, and let him find which food is the 
purest, and then bring you provisions from it. Let him be ‘exceptionally’ 
cautious, and do not let him give you away. 20. For, indeed, if they find out 
about you, they will stone you ‘to death’, or force you back into their faith, 
and then you will never succeed.” 


The Hideout Is Found 
21. That is how We caused them to be discovered so that their people might 
know that Allah’s promise ‘of resurrection’ is true and that there is no doubt 
about the Hour.'=22] When the people disputed with each other about the 
case of the youth ‘after their death’, 224] some proposed, “Build a structure 
around them. Their Lord knows best about them.” Those who prevailed in 
the matter said, “We will surely build a place of worship over them.” 


How Many Were They? 
22. Some will say, “They were three, their dog was the fourth,” while others 
will say, “They were five, their dog was the sixth,” ‘only’ guessing blindly. 
And others will say, “They were seven and their dog was the eighth.” Say, 
"O Prophet,* “My Lord knows best their ‘exact’ number. Only a few people 
know as well.” So do not argue about them except with sure knowledge, 
[352] nor consult any of those “who debate” about them. 


Say, “Allah Willing” 
23. And never say of anything, “I will definitely do this tomorrow,” 24. 
without adding, “if Allah so wills!” But if you forget, then remember your 
Lord, and say, “I trust my Lord will guide me to what is more right than 
this.” 


Time Spent in the Cave 
25. They had remained in their cave for three hundred years, adding nine. 
[553] 26. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Allah knows best how long they stayed. With 
Him ‘alone’ is "the knowledge of' the unseen of the heavens and the earth. 
How perfectly He hears and sees! They have no guardian besides Him, and 
He shares His command with none.” 


Advice to the Prophet 


27. Recite what has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord. None 
can change His Words, nor can you find any refuge besides Him. 28. And 
patiently stick with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, 
seeking His pleasure.'24! Do not let your eyes look beyond them, desiring 
the luxuries of this worldly life. And do not obey those whose hearts We 
have made heedless of Our remembrance, who follow ‘only’ their desires 
and whose state is "total" loss. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 
29. And say, "O Prophet,’ “This is’ the truth from your Lord. Whoever 
wills let them believe, and whoever wills let them disbelieve.” Surely We 
have prepared for the wrongdoers a Fire whose walls will ‘completely’ 
surround them. When they cry for aid, they will be aided with water like 
molten metal, which will burn ‘their’ faces. What a horrible drink! And 
what a terrible place to rest! 


Reward of the Believers 
30. As for those who believe and do good, We certainly never deny the 
reward of those who are best in deeds. 31. It is they who will have the 
Gardens of Eternity, with rivers flowing under their feet. There they will be 
adomed with bracelets of gold, and wear green garments of fine silk and 
rich brocade, reclining there on ‘canopied’ couches. What a marvellous 
reward! And what a fabulous place to rest! 


Story 2) The Owner of the Two Gardens 

32. Give them "O Prophet’ an example of two men. To ‘the disbelieving' 
one We gave two gardens of grapevines, which We surrounded with palm 
trees and placed ‘various’ crops in between. 33. Each garden yielded ‘all’ its 
produce, never falling short. And We caused a river to flow between them. 
34. And he had other resources!=25! "as well’. So he boasted to a "poor 
companion of his, while conversing with him, “I am greater than you in 
wealth and superior in manpower.” 35. And he entered his property, while 
wronging his soul, saying, “I do not think this will ever perish, 36. nor do I 
think the Hour will "ever’ come. And if in fact I am returned to my Lord, I 
will definitely get a far better outcome than ‘all’ this.” 


The Rebuttal 


37. His ‘believing’ companion replied, while conversing with him, “Do you 
disbelieve in the One Who created you from dust,'2°®! then "developed you’ 
from a sperm-drop, then formed you into a man? 38. But as for me: He is 
Allah, my Lord, and I will never associate anyone with my Lord ‘in 
worship’. 39. If only you had said, upon entering your property, ‘This is 
what Allah has willed! There is no power except with Allah!’ Even though 
you see me inferior to you in wealth and offspring, 40. perhaps my Lord 
will grant me ‘something’ better than your garden, and send down upon 
your garden a thunderbolt from the sky, turning it into a barren waste. 41. 
Or its water may sink "into the earth’, and then you will never be able to 
seek it out.” 


The Punishment 
42. And so all his produce was ‘totally’ ruined, so he started to wring his 
hands for all he had spent on it, while it had collapsed on its trellises. He 
cried, “Alas! I wish I had never associated anyone with my Lord ‘in 
worship'!” 43. And he had no manpower to help him against Allah, nor 
could he ‘even’ help himself. 44. At this time, support comes ‘only’ from 
Allah—the True "Lord". He is best in reward and best in outcome. 


Fleeting and Everlasting Gains 
45. And give them a parable of this worldly life. "It is* like the plants of the 
earth, thriving when sustained by the rain We send down from the sky. Then 
they ‘soon’ turn into chaff scattered by the wind. And Allah is fully capable 
of ‘doing’ all things. 46. Wealth and children are the adornment of this 
worldly life, but the everlasting good deeds are far better with your Lord in 
reward and in hope.!222! 


Judgment Day 
47. "Beware of" the Day We will blow the mountains away, and you will see 
the earth laid bare. And We will gather all ‘humankind’, leaving none 
behind. 48. They will be presented before your Lord in rows, ‘and the 
deniers will be told,’ “You have surely returned to Us ‘all alone’ as We 
created you the first time, although you ‘always’ claimed that We would 
never appoint a time for your return.” 49. And the record ‘of deeds’ will be 
laid ‘open’, and you will see the wicked in fear of what is ‘written’ in it. 
They will cry, “Woe to us! What kind of record is this that does not leave 


any sin, small or large, unlisted?” They will find whatever they did present 
"before them’. And your Lord will never wrong anyone. 


Satan and His Followers 

50. And ‘remember’ when We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” 
so they all did—but not IbIis,'=28! who was one of the jinn, but he rebelled 
against the command of his Lord. Would you then take him and his 
descendants as patrons instead of Me, although they are your enemy? What 
an evil alternative for the wrongdoers ‘to choose’! 51. I never called them to 
witness the creation of the heavens and the earth or ‘even’ their own 
creation, nor would I take the misleaders as helpers. 52. And "beware of" the 
Day He will say, “Call upon those you claimed were My associate-gods.” 
So they will call them, but will receive no response. And We will make 
them ‘all’ share in the same doom. 53. The wicked will see the Fire and 
realize that they are bound to fall into it, and will find no way to avoid it. 


Denying the Quran 

54. We have surely set forth in this Quran every ‘kind of" lesson for people, 
but humankind is the most argumentative of all beings. 55. And nothing 
prevents people from believing when guidance comes to them and from 
seeking their Lord’s forgiveness except ‘their demand’ to meet the same fate 
of earlier deniers or that the torment would confront them face to face. 56. 
We do not send the messengers except as deliverers of good news and 
warners. But the disbelievers argue in falsehood, ‘hoping’ to discredit the 
truth with it, and make a mockery of My revelations and warnings. 57. And 
who does more wrong than those who, when reminded of their Lord’s 
revelations, turn away from them and forget what their own hands have 
done? We have certainly cast veils over their hearts—leaving them unable 
to comprehend this "Quran’—and deafness in their ears. And if you "O 
Prophet’ invite them to ‘true’ guidance, they will never be ‘rightly’ guided. 


Allah’s Forbearance 
58. Your Lord is the All-Forgiving, Full of Mercy. If He were to seize them 
‘immediately’ for what they commit, He would have certainly hastened 
their punishment. But they have an appointed time, from which they will 
find no refuge. 59. Those ‘are the’ societies We destroyed when they 
persisted in wrong,!2°2! and We had set a time for their destruction. 


Story 3) Moses and Al-Khadir 

60. And ‘remember’ when Moses said to his young assistant, “I will never 
give up until I reach the junction of the two seas, even if I travel for 
ages.”!960] 61. But when they “finally” reached the point where the seas met, 
they forgot their ‘salted’ fish, and it made its way into the sea, slipping 
away ‘wondrously’. 62. When they had passed further, he said to his 
assistant, “Bring us our meal! We have certainly been exhausted by today’s 
journey.” 63. He replied, “Do you remember when we rested by the rock? 
“That is when’ I forgot the fish. None made me forget to mention this except 
Satan. And the fish made its way into the sea miraculously.”!°©4! 64. Moses 
responded, “That is ‘exactly’ what we were looking for.”!362] So they 
returned, retracing their footsteps. 


The Encounter 
65. There they found a servant of Ours, to whom We had granted mercy 
from Us and enlightened with knowledge of Our Own. 66. Moses said to 
him, “May I follow you, provided that you teach me some of the right 
guidance you have been taught?” 67. He said, “You certainly cannot be 
patient “enough’ with me. 68. And how can you be patient with what is 
beyond your ‘realm of’ knowledge?” 69. Moses assured ‘him’, “You will 
find me patient, Allah willing, and I will not disobey any of your orders.” 
70. He responded, “Then if you follow me, do not question me about 
anything until I "myself clarify it for you.” 
The Ship Incident 

71. So they set out, but after they had boarded a ship, the man made a hole 
in it. Moses protested, “Have you done this to drown its people? You have 
certainly done a terrible thing!” 72. He replied, “Did I not say that you 
cannot have patience with me?” 73. Moses pleaded, “Excuse me for 
forgetting, and do not be hard on me.” 


The Boy Incident 
74. So they proceeded until they came across a boy, and the man killed him. 
Moses protested, “Have you killed an innocent soul, who killed no one? 
You have certainly done a horrible thing.” 75. He answered, “Did I not tell 
you that you cannot have patience with me?” 76. Moses replied, “If I ever 


question you about anything after this, then do not keep me in your 
company, for by then I would have given you enough of an excuse.” 


The Wall Incident 
77. So they moved on until they came to the people of a town. They asked 
them for food, but the people refused to give them hospitality. There they 
found a wall ready to collapse, so the man set it right. Moses protested, “If 
you wanted, you could have demanded a fee for this.” 78. He replied, “This 
is the parting of our ways. I will explain to you what you could not bear 
patiently. 


The Ship 
79. “As for the ship, it belonged to some poor people, working at sea. So I 
intended to damage it, for there was a ‘tyrant’ king ahead of them who 
seizes every ‘good' ship by force. 


The Boy 
80. “And as for the boy, his parents were ‘true’ believers, and wel263] feared 
that he would pressure them into defiance and disbelief. 81. So we hoped 
that their Lord would give them another, more virtuous and caring in his 
place. 


The Wall 
82. “And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and 
under the wall was a treasure that belonged to them, and their father had 
been a righteous man. So your Lord willed that these children should come 
of age and retrieve their treasure, as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do it 
‘all’ on my own. This is the explanation of what you could not bear 
patiently. ”!254! 


Story 4) Zul-Qarnain 
83. They ask you "O Prophet’ about Zul-Qarnain. Say, “I will relate to you 
something of his narrative.”!255! 84. Surely We established him in the land, 
and gave him the means to all things. 


Journey to the West 
85. So he travelled a course, 86. until he reached the setting "point’ of the 
sun, which appeared to him to be setting in a spring of murky water, where 
he found some people. We said, “O Zul-Qarnain! Either punish them or 
treat them kindly.” 87. He responded, “Whoever does wrong will be 


punished by us, then will be returned to their Lord, Who will punish them 
with a horrible torment. 88. As for those who believe and do good, they will 
have the finest reward, and we will assign them easy commands.” 


Journey to the East 
89. Then he travelled a ‘different’ course 90. until he reached the rising 
"point’ of the sun. He found it rising on a people for whom We had provided 
no shelter from it.!88] 91. So it was. And We truly had full knowledge of 
him. 
Another Journey 

92. Then he travelled a ‘third’ course 93. until he reached ‘a pass’ between 
two mountains. He found in front of them a people who could hardly 
understand ‘his’ language. 94. They pleaded, “O Zul-Qarnain! Surely Gog 
and Magog!®®7! are spreading corruption throughout the land. Should we 
pay you tribute, provided that you build a wall between us and them?” 95. 
He responded, “What my Lord has provided for me is far better. But assist 
me with resources, and I will build a barrier between you and them. 96. 
Bring me blocks of iron!” Then, when he had filled up ‘the gap’ between 
the two mountains, he ordered, “Blow!” When the iron became red hot, he 
said, “Bring me molten copper to pour over it.” 97. And so the enemies 
could neither scale nor tunnel through it. 98. He declared, “This is a mercy 
from my Lord. But when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will 
level it to the ground. And my Lord’s promise is ever true.” 99. On that 
Day, We will let them!=®8! surge "like waves" over one another. Later, the 
Trumpet will be blown,!°©2! and We will gather all "people" together. 


The Wicked on Judgment Day 
100. On that Day We will display Hell clearly for the disbelievers, 101. 
those who turned a blind eye to My Reminder!2! and could not stand 
listening "to it’. 102. Do the disbelievers think they can ‘simply’ take My 
servants!221! as lords instead of Me? We have surely prepared Hell as an 
accommodation for the disbelievers. 


The Losers 
103. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Shall we inform you of who will lose the most 
deeds? 104. "They are’ those whose efforts are in vain in this worldly life, 
while they think they are doing good!” 105. It is they who reject the signs 


of their Lord and their meeting with Him, rendering their deeds void, so We 
will not give their deeds any weight on Judgment Day. 106. That is their 
reward: Hell, for their disbelief and mockery of My signs and messengers. 


The Winners 
107. Indeed, those who believe and do good will have the Gardens of 
Paradise!222! as an accommodation, 108. where they will be forever, never 
desiring anywhere else. 


Recording Allah’s Knowledge 
109. Say, "O Prophet,’ “If the ocean were ink for ‘writing’ the Words of my 
Lord, it would certainly run out before the Words of my Lord were finished, 
even if We refilled it with its equal.” 


Have Faith and Do Good 
110. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I am only a man like you, ‘but’ it has been revealed 
to me that your God is only One God. So whoever hopes for the meeting 
with their Lord, let them do good deeds and associate none in the worship 
of their Lord.” 
kkk 


19. Mary 
(Mariam) 


This Meccan sûrah recounts the miraculous stories of the birth of Jesus by 
the virgin Mary (after whom the sûrah is named) and the birth of John the 
Baptist to old Zachariah and his elderly, barren wife. Other prophets are 
cited as recipients of Allah’s favour and grace. Attributing children to Allah 
(verses 88-95) and denial of resurrection (verses 66-70) are rejected as 
outrageous and blasphemous. Both the end of this sûrah and the beginning 
of the next one talk about the purpose of revealing the Quran. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Zachariah’s Prayer 

1. Kaf-Ha-Ya-’Ain- Sdd. 2. "This is’ a reminder of your Lord’s mercy to His 
servant Zachariah, 3. when he cried out to his Lord privately, 4. saying, 
“My Lord! Surely my bones have become brittle, and grey hair has spread 
across my head, but I have never been disappointed in my prayer to You, 
my Lord! 5. And I am concerned about ‘the faith of’ my relatives after me, 
since my wife is barren. So grant me, by Your grace, an heir, 6. who will 
inherit ‘prophethood’ from me and the family of Jacob, and make him, O 
Lord, pleasing ‘to You"!” 


Prayer Answered 

7. ‘The angels announced,’ “O Zachariah! Indeed, We give you the good 
news of ‘the birth of’ a son, whose name will be John—a name We have not 
given to anyone before.” 8. He wondered, “My Lord! How can I have a son 
when my wife is barren, and I have become extremely old?” 9. An angel 
replied, “So will it be! Your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me, just as I created 
you before, when you were nothing!’” 10. Zachariah said, “My Lord! Grant 
me a sign.” He responded, “Your sign is that you will not "be able to’ speak 
to people for three nights, despite being healthy.” 11. So he came out to his 
people from the sanctuary, signalling to them to glorify "Allah’ morning and 
evening. 


John’s Noble Qualities 


12. ‘It was later said," “O John! Hold firmly to the Scriptures.” And We 
granted him wisdom while ‘he was still’ a child, 13. as well as purity and 
compassion from Us. And he was God-fearing, 14. and kind to his parents. 
He was neither arrogant nor disobedient. 15. Peace be upon him the day he 
was born, and the day of his death, and the day he will be raised back to 
life! 


Gabriel Visits Mary 

16. And mention in the Book "O Prophet, the story of’ Mary when she 
withdrew from her family to a place in the east, 17. screening herself off 
from them. Then We sent to her Our angel, ‘Gabriel,’ appearing before her 
as a man, perfectly formed. 18. She appealed, “I truly seek refuge in the 
Most Compassionate from you! ‘So leave me alone’ if you are God- 
fearing.” 19. He responded, “I am only a messenger from your Lord, ‘sent’ 
to bless you with a pure son.” 20. She wondered, “How can I have a son 
when no man has ever touched me, nor am I unchaste?” 21. He replied, “So 
will it be! Your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me. And so will We make him a 
sign for humanity and a mercy from Us.’ It is a matter ‘already’ decreed.” 


Jesus’ Virgin Birth 

22. So she conceived him and withdrew with him to a remote place. 23. 
Then the pains of labour drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She cried, 
“Alas! I wish I had died before this, and was a thing long forgotten!” 24. So 
a voice!223! reassured her from below her, “Do not grieve! Your Lord has 
provided a stream at your feet. 25. And shake the trunk of this palm tree 
towards you, it will drop fresh, ripe dates upon you. 26. So eat and drink, 
and put your heart at ease. But if you see any of the people, say, ‘I have 
vowed silence!24! to the Most Compassionate, so I am not talking to 
anyone today.’” 


Reaction to Baby Jesus 
27. Then she returned to her people, carrying him. They said ‘in shock’, “O 
Mary! You have certainly done a horrible thing! 28. O sister of Aaron!!525! 
Your father was not an indecent man, nor was your mother unchaste.” 29. 
So she pointed to the baby. They exclaimed, “How can we talk to someone 
who is an infant in the cradle?” 


Baby Jesus Talks 


30. Jesus declared, “I am truly a servant of Allah. He has destined me to be 
given the Scripture and to be a prophet. 31. He has made me a blessing 
wherever I go, and bid me to establish prayer and give alms-tax as long as I 
live, 32. and to be kind to my mother. He has not made me arrogant or 
defiant. 33. Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day 
I will be raised back to life!” 


Christians and Jews Differ on Jesus 

34. That is Jesus, son of Mary. ‘And this is* a word of truth, about which 
they dispute. 35. It is not for Allah to take a son! Glory be to Him. When 
He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” And it is! 36. "Jesus also 
declared,’ “Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him ‘alone’. 
This is the Straight Path.” 37. Yet their ‘various’ groups have differed 
among themselves ‘about him’, so woe to the disbelievers when they face a 
tremendous Day! 38. How clearly will they hear and see on the Day they 
will come to Us! But today the wrongdoers are clearly astray. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 
39. And warn them "O Prophet’ of the Day of Regret, when all matters will 
be settled, while they are ‘engrossed’ in heedlessness and disbelief. 40. 
Indeed, it is We Who will succeed the earth and whoever is on it. And to Us 
they will ‘all’ be returned. 


Abraham and His Father, Azar 
41. And mention in the Book "O Prophet, the story of’ Abraham. He was 
surely a man of truth and a prophet. 42. "Remember" when he said to his 
father, “O dear father! Why do you worship what can neither hear nor see, 
nor benefit you at all? 43. O dear father! I have certainly received some 
knowledge which you have not received, so follow me and I will guide you 
to the Straight Path. 44. O dear father! Do not worship Satan. Surely Satan 
is ever rebellious against the Most Compassionate. 45. O dear father! I truly 
fear that you will be touched by a torment from the Most Compassionate, 
and become Satan’s companion ‘in Hell’.” 
Azar’s Angry Response 

46. He threatened, “How dare you reject my idols, O Abraham! If you do 
not desist, I will certainly stone you ‘to death’. So be gone from me for a 
long time!” 47. Abraham responded, “Peace be upon you! I will pray to my 


Lord for your forgiveness. He has truly been Most Gracious to me. 48. As I 
distance myself from ‘all of’ you and from whatever you invoke besides 
Allah, I will ‘continue to’ call upon my Lord ‘alone’, trusting that I will 
never be disappointed in invoking my Lord.” 49. So after he had left them 
and what they worshipped besides Allah, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, 
and made each of them a prophet. 50. We showered them with Our mercy, 
and blessed them with honourable mention.!26! 


Prophet Moses 
51. And mention in the Book "O Prophet, the story of’ Moses. He was truly 
a chosen man, and was a messenger and a prophet. 52. We called him from 
the right side of Mount Tir, and drew him near, speaking ‘with him’ 
directly. 53. And We appointed for him—out of Our grace—his brother, 
Aaron, as a prophet. 


Prophet Ishmael 
54. And mention in the Book "O Prophet, the story of’ Ishmael. He was 
truly a man of his word, and was a messenger and a prophet. 55. He used to 
urge his people to pray and give alms-tax. And his Lord was well pleased 
with him. 


Prophet Enoch 
56. And mention in the Book "O Prophet, the story of’ Enoch. He was 
surely a man of truth and a prophet. 57. And We elevated him to an 
honourable status. !22Z! 


Noble Prophets 
58. Those were ‘some of' the prophets who Allah has blessed from among 
the descendants of Adam, and of those We carried with Noah ‘in the Ark’, 
and of the descendants of Abraham and Israel,'2Z2! and of those We "rightly" 
guided and chose. Whenever the revelations of the Most Compassionate 
were recited to them, they fell down, prostrating and weeping. 


Evil Successors 
59. But they were succeeded by generations who neglected prayer and 
followed their lusts and so will soon face the evil consequences.!22! 60. As 
for those who repent, believe, and do good, it is they who will be admitted 
into Paradise, never being denied any reward. 61. ‘They will be in’ the 
Gardens of Eternity, promised in trust by the Most Compassionate to His 


servants. Surely His promise will be fulfilled. 62. There they will never hear 
any idle talk—only ‘greetings of’ peace. And there they will have their 
provisions morning and evening.!282! 63. That is Paradise, which We will 
grant to whoever is devout among Our servants. 


Gabriel’s Response to the Prophet 281. 
64. “We only descend by the command of your Lord. To Him belongs 
whatever is before us, and whatever is behind us, and everything in 
between. And your Lord is never forgetful. 65. "He is the’ Lord of the 
heavens, and the earth, and everything in between. So worship Him ‘alone’, 
and be steadfast in His worship. Do you know of anyone equal to Him ‘in 
His attributes '?” 


The Deniers of Resurrection 

66. Yet ‘some’ people ask "mockingly’, “After I die, will I really be raised to 
life again?” 67. Do ‘such’ people not remember that We created them 
before, when they were nothing? 68. By your Lord "O Prophet’! We will 
surely gather them along with the devils, and then set them around Hell on 
their knees. 69. Then We will certainly begin by dragging out of every 
group the ones most defiant to the Most Compassionate. 70. And We truly 
know best who is most deserving of burning in it. 71. There is none of you 
who will not pass over it.!82] "This is* a decree your Lord must fulfil. 72. 
Then We will deliver those who were devout, leaving the wrongdoers there 
on their knees. 


Arrogant Disbelievers 

73. When Our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers ask the 
believers "mockingly’, “Which of the two of us is better in status and 
superior in assembly?” 74. ‘Imagine, O Prophet’ how many peoples We 
have destroyed before them, who were far better in luxury and splendour! 
75. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Whoever is ‘entrenched’ in misguidance, the Most 
Compassionate will allow them plenty of time, until—behold!—they face 
what they are threatened with: either the torment or the Hour. Only then 
will they realize who is worse in position and inferior in manpower.” 


Reward of the Devout 
76. And Allah increases in guidance those who are ‘rightly’ guided. And the 
everlasting good deeds are far better with your Lord in reward and in 


outcome.|283! 


A Denier of Resurrection 
77. Have you seen "O Prophet’ the one'=®4! who rejects Our revelations yet 
boasts, “I will definitely be granted ‘plenty of’ wealth and children ‘if there 
is an afterlife’.”? 78. Has he looked into the unseen or taken a pledge from 
the Most Compassionate? 79. Not at all! We certainly record whatever he 
claims and will increase his punishment extensively. 80. And We will 
inherit what he boasts of, and he will come before Us all by himself. 


Believers and Disbelievers on Judgment Day 

81. They have taken other gods, instead of Allah, seeking strength ‘and 
protection’ through them. 82. But no! Those ‘gods’ will deny their worship 
and turn against them. 83. Do you "O Prophet’ not see that We have sent the 
devils against the disbelievers, constantly inciting them? 84. So do not be in 
haste against them, for indeed We are ‘closely’ counting down their days. 
85. "Watch for’ the Day We will gather the righteous before the Most 
Compassionate as an honoured delegation, 86. and drive the wicked to Hell 
like a thirsty herd. 87. None will have the right to intercede, except those 
who have taken a covenant from the Most Compassionate. !285! 


Allah’s Children? 

88. They!285! say, “The Most Compassionate has offspring.” 89. You have 
certainly made an outrageous claim, 90. by which the heavens are about to 
burst, the earth to split apart, and the mountains to crumble to pieces 91. in 
protest of attributing children to the Most Compassionate. 92. It does not 
befit ‘the majesty of’ the Most Compassionate to have children. 93. There is 
none in the heavens or the earth who will not return to the Most 
Compassionate in full submission. 94. Indeed, He fully knows them and has 
counted them precisely. 95. And each of them will return to Him on the Day 
of Judgment all alone. 


Believers’ Love for One Another 
96. As for those who believe and do good, the Most Compassionate will 
‘certainly’ bless them with ‘genuine’ love. 


The Message of the Quran 
97. Indeed, We have made this ‘Quran" easy in your own language "O 
Prophet’ so with it you may give good news to the righteous and warn those 


who are contentious. 98. ‘Imagine’ how many peoples We have destroyed 
before them! Do you ‘still’ see any of them, or ‘even’ hear from them the 
slightest sound? 

kkk 


20. Ta-Ha 
(7â-Hâ) 
wise wise 
Since Moses ( .{z.{;) and Adam ( .{z-{;) are mentioned passingly in the 
previous staff, Meir stories are r ah ted here in great detail. This Meccan 
sûrah reassures the Prophet ( -{z.[;) that the truth always prevails even 
against the most tyrannical ofpéSition (in the form of Pharaoh) and that 
Allah is able to open even the hardest of hearts (in the form of Pharaoh’s 
magicians). Both the beginning and the end of the sûrah emphasize the 
divine nature of the Quran as a source of guidance and eternal bliss. Those 
who turn away from the Quranic reminder are warned of misery in this 
wouldjgnd horrifying punishment on the Day of Judgment. The Prophet 
(-{«#.(;) is advised to seek comfort in patience and prayer against pagan 
iat which is detailed at the beginning of the next strah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Almighty Allah’s Revelation 

1. 7â-Hâ. 2. We have not revealed the Quran to you "O Prophet" to cause 
you distress, 3. but as a reminder to those in awe ‘of Allah’. 4. ‘It is’ a 
revelation from the One Who created the earth and the high heavens— 5. 
the Most Compassionate, ‘Who is’ established on the Throne. 6. To Him 
belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and 
whatever is in between and whatever is underground. 7. Whether you speak 
openly ‘or not’, He certainly knows what is secret and what is even more 
hidden. 8. Allah—there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. He has 
the Most Beautiful Names. 


Moses’ Great Encounter 
9. Has the story of Moses reached you "O Prophet’? 10. When he saw a fire, 
he said to his family, “Wait here, ‘for’ I have spotted a fire. Perhaps I can 
bring you a torch from it, or find some guidance at the fire.”!282! 11. But 
when he approached it, he was called, “O Moses! 12. It is truly I. I am your 
Lord! So take off your sandals, for you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa. 13. 
I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed: 14. ‘It is truly I. I am 


Allah! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Me. So worship Me 
‘alone’, and establish prayer for My remembrance. 15. The Hour is sure to 
come. My Will is to keep it hidden, so that every soul may be rewarded 
according to their efforts. 16. So do not let those who disbelieve in it and 
follow their desires distract you from it, or you will be doomed.’” 


Two Signs for Moses 

17. “Allah added,’ “And what is that in your right hand, O Moses?” 18. He 
replied, “It is my staff! I lean on it, and with it I beat down ‘branches’ for 
my sheep, and have other uses for it.”'288] 19, Allah said, “Throw it down, 
O Moses!” 20. So he did, then—behold!—it became a serpent, slithering. 
21. Allah said, “Take it, and have no fear. We will return it to its former 
state. 22. And put your hand under your armpit, it will come out ‘shining’ 
white, unblemished,'82! as another sign, 23. so that We may show you 
some of Our greatest signs. 24. Go to Pharaoh, for he has truly transgressed 
“all bounds’.” 


Moses Prays for Help 

25. Moses prayed, “My Lord! Uplift my heart for me, 26. and make my task 
easy, 27. and remove the impediment from my tongue 28. so people may 
understand my speech,'2“2! 29. and grant me a helper from my family, 30. 
Aaron, my brother. 31. Strengthen me through him, 32. and let him share 
my task, 33. so that we may glorify You much 34. and remember You 
much, 35. for truly You have ‘always’ been overseeing us.” 36. Allah 
responded, “All that you requested has been granted, O Moses! 


Allah’s Favours to Young Moses 
37. “And surely We had shown You favour before, 38. when We inspired 
your mother with this: 39. ‘Put him into a chest, then put it into the river. 
The river will wash it ashore, and he will be taken by "Pharaoh,’ an enemy 
of Mine and his.’ And I blessed you with lovability from Mel? "O Moses” 
so that you would be brought up under My ‘watchful’ Eye. 40. "Remember’ 
when your sister came along and proposed, ‘Shall I direct you to someone 
who will nurse him?’!222! So We reunited you with your mother so that her 
heart would be put at ease, and she would not grieve. ‘Later’ you killed a 
man ‘by mistake’, but We saved you from sorrow, as well as other tests We 
put you through. Then you stayed for a number of years among the people 


of Midian. Then you came here as pre-destined, O Moses! 41. And I have 
selected you for My service. 


Orders to Moses and Aaron 
42. “Go forth, you and your brother, with My signs and never falter in 
remembering Me. 43. Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has truly 
transgressed ‘all bounds’. 44. Speak to him gently, so perhaps he may be 
mindful "of Me’ or fearful ‘of My punishment’.” 45. They both pleaded, 
“Our Lord! We fear that he may be quick to harm us or act tyrannically.” 
46. Allah reassured ‘them’, “Have no fear! I am with you, hearing and 
seeing. 47. So go to him and say, ‘Indeed we are both messengers from your 
Lord, so let the Children of Israel go with us, and do not oppress them. We 
have come to you with a sign from your Lord. And salvation will be for 
whoever follows the ‘right’ guidance. 48. It has indeed been revealed to us 
that the punishment will be upon whoever denies ‘the truth’ and turns 


333 


away. 


Pharaoh’s Arrogance 

49. Pharaoh asked, “Who then is the Lord of you two, O Moses?” 50. He 
answered, “Our Lord is the One Who has given everything its ‘distinctive’ 
form, then guided ‘it’.” 51. Pharaoh asked, “And what about previous 
peoples?” 52. He replied, “That knowledge is with my Lord in a Record. 
My Lord neither falters nor forgets ‘anything’.” 53. "He is the One’ Who 
has laid out the earth for ‘all of' you, and set in it pathways for you, and 
sends down rain from the sky, causing various types of plants to grow, 54. 
"so` eat and graze your cattle. Surely in this are signs for people of sound 
judgment. 55. From the earth We created you, and into it We will return 
you, and from it We will bring you back again. 


The Challenge 
56. And We certainly showed Pharaoh all of Our signs, 22] but he denied 
them and refused ‘to believe’. 57. He said, “Have you come to drive us out 
of our land with your magic, O Moses? 58. We can surely meet you with 
similar magic. So set for us an appointment that neither of us will fail to 
keep, in a central place.” 59. Moses said, “Your appointment is on the Day 
of the Festival, and let the people be gathered mid-morning.” 


Moses’ Warning 


60. Pharaoh then withdrew, orchestrated his scheme, then returned. 61. 
Moses warned the magicians, “Woe to you! Do not fabricate a lie against 
Allah,'=“4! or He will wipe you out with a torment. Whoever fabricates “lies” 
is bound to fail.” 62. So the magicians disputed the matter among 
themselves, conversing privately. 63. They concluded, “These two are only 
magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic, and do 
away with your most cherished traditions. 64. So orchestrate your plan, then 
come forward in ‘perfect’ ranks. And whoever prevails today will certainly 
be successful.” 


Moses Prevails 

65. They said, “O Moses! Either you cast, or let us be the first to cast.” 66. 
Moses responded, “No, you go first.” And suddenly their ropes and staffs 
appeared to him—by their magic—to be slithering. 67. So Moses concealed 
fear within himself. 68. We reassured ‘him’, “Do not fear! It is certainly you 
who will prevail. 69. Cast what is in your right hand, and it will swallow up 
what they have made, for what they have made is no more than a magic 
trick. And magicians can never succeed wherever they go.” 


Magicians Become Believers 
70. So the magicians fell down in prostration, declaring, “We believe in the 
Lord of Aaron and Moses.” 71. Pharaoh threatened, “How dare you believe 
in him before I give you permission? He must be your master who taught 
you magic. I will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, 
and crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. You will really see whose 
punishment is more severe and more lasting.” 72. They responded, “By the 
One Who created us! We will never prefer you over the clear proofs that 
have come to us. So do whatever you want! Your authority only covers the 
‘fleeting’ life of this world. 73. Indeed, we have believed in our Lord so He 
may forgive our sins and that magic you have forced us to practice. And 


1°99 


Allah is far superior ‘in reward’ and more lasting ‘in punishment’. 


Reward of Disbelievers and Believers 
74. Whoever comes to their Lord as an evildoer will certainly have Hell, 
where they can neither live nor die. 75. But whoever comes to Him as a 
believer, having done good, they will have the highest ranks: 76. the 
Gardens of Eternity, under which rivers flow, where they will stay forever. 
That is the reward of those who purify themselves. 


Pharaoh’s Doom 
77. And We surely inspired Moses, ‘saying,’ “Leave with My servants ‘at 
night’ and strike a dry passage for them across the sea. Have no fear of 
being overtaken, nor be concerned ‘of drowning’.” 78. Then Pharaoh 
pursued them with his soldiers—but how overwhelming were the waters 
that submerged them! 79. And ‘so’ Pharaoh led his people astray, and did 
not guide ‘them rightly’. 


Allah’s Favours to the Israelites 

80. O Children of Israel! We saved you from your enemy, and made an 
appointment with you!"! on the right side of Mount Tar, and sent down to 
you manna and quails, '"°5! 81. saying,’ “Eat from the good things We have 
provided for you, but do not transgress in them, or My wrath will befall 
you. And whoever My wrath befalls is certainly doomed. 82. But I am truly 
Most Forgiving to whoever repents, believes, and does good, then persists 
on ‘true’ guidance.” 


The Golden Calf 

83. "Allah asked,’ “Why have you come with such haste ahead of your 
people, O Moses?”!222! 84. He replied, “They are close on my tracks. And I 
have hastened to You, my Lord, so You will be pleased.” 85. Allah 
responded, “We have indeed tested your people in your absence, and the 
Samiri!228! has led them astray.” 86. So Moses returned to his people, 
furious and sorrowful. He said, “O my people! Had your Lord not made you 
a good promise?!22! Has my absence been too long for you? Or have you 
wished for wrath from your Lord to befall you, so you broke your promise 
to me?”[600] 


The Calf Worshippers 

87. They argued, “We did not break our promise to you of our own free 
will, but we were made to carry the burden of the people’s ‘golden’ 
jewellery, (24! then we threw it ‘into the fire’, and so did the Samiri.” 88. 
Then he moulded for them an idol of a calf that made a lowing sound. They 
said, “This is your god and the god of Moses, but Moses forgot ‘where it 
was'!” 89. Did they not see that it did not respond to them, nor could it 
protect or benefit them? 


Aaron’s Stance 


90. Aaron had already warned them beforehand, “O my people! You are 
only being tested by this, for indeed your ‘one true’ Lord is the Most 
Compassionate. So follow me and obey my orders.” 91. They replied, “We 
will not cease to worship it until Moses returns to us.” 92. Moses scolded 
"his brother’, “O Aaron! What prevented you, when you saw them going 
astray, 93. from following after me? How could you disobey my 
orders?”!£22] 94, Aaron pleaded, “O son of my mother! Do not seize me by 
my beard or "the hair of’ my head. I really feared that you would say, ‘You 
have caused division among the Children of Israel, and did not observe my 
word.’” 


The Sadmiri’s Punishment 

95. Moses then asked, “What did you think you were doing, O Samiri?” 96. 
He said, “I saw what they did not see, so I took a handful "of dust’ from the 
hoof-prints of ‘the horse of* the messenger-angel ‘Gabriel’ then cast it ‘on 
the moulded calf’. This is what my lower-self tempted me into.”!®3! 97, 
Moses said, “Go away then! And for ‘the rest of your’ life you will surely 
be crying, ‘Do not touch "me"!’!©4! Then you will certainly have a fate!®25! 
that you cannot escape. Now look at your god to which you have been 
devoted: we will burn it up, then scatter it in the sea completely.” 98. "Then 
Moses addressed his people,’ “Your only god is Allah, there is no god 
“worthy of worship’ except Him. He encompasses everything in ‘His’ 
knowledge.” 


The Deniers of the Quran 

99. This is how We relate to you "O Prophet’ some of the stories of the past. 
And We have certainly granted you a Reminder'™5! from Us. 100. Whoever 
turns away from it will surely bear the burden ‘of sin’ on the Day of 
Judgment, 101. suffering its consequences forever. What an evil burden 
they will carry on Judgment Day! 102. "Beware of’ the Day the Trumpet 
will be blown,'®22! and We will gather the wicked on that Day blue-faced 
"from horror and thirst’.'928! 103. They will whisper among themselves, 
“You stayed no more than ten days ‘on the earth’.” 104. We know best what 
they will say—the most reasonable of them will say, “You stayed no more 
than a day.” 


Mountains on Judgment Day 


105. And "if" they ask you "O Prophet’ about the mountains, ‘then’ say, “My 
Lord will wipe them out completely, 106. leaving the earth level and bare, 
107. with neither depressions nor elevations to be seen.” 


People on Judgment Day 

108. On that Day all will follow the caller "for assembly’, ‘and’ none will 
dare to deviate. All voices will be hushed before the Most Compassionate. 
Only whispers!®22! will be heard. 109. On that Day no intercession will be 
of any benefit, except by those granted permission by the Most 
Compassionate and whose words are agreeable to Him. 110. He ‘fully’ 
knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them,!#2! but they cannot 
encompass Him in ‘their’ knowledge.'©) 111. And all faces will be 
humbled before the Ever-Living, All-Sustaining. And those burdened with 
wrongdoing will be in loss. 112. But whoever does good and is a believer 
will have no fear of being wronged or denied "their reward’. 


The Quran 
113. And so We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran and varied the 
warnings in it, so perhaps they will shun evil or it may cause them to be 
mindful. 114. Exalted is Allah, the True King! Do not rush to recite ‘a 
revelation of’ the Quran "O Prophet’ before it is "properly’ conveyed to you, 
[612] and pray, “My Lord! Increase me in knowledge.” 


Satan vs. Adam 

115. And indeed, We once made a covenant with Adam, but he forgot, and 
"so` We did not find determination in him. 116. And ‘remember’ when We 
said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they all did—but not Iblis, 
[613] who refused ‘arrogantly’. 117. So We cautioned, “O Adam! This is 
surely an enemy to you and to your wife. So do not let him drive you both 
out of Paradise, for you "O Adam’ would then suffer hardship’. 118. Here it 
is guaranteed that you will never go hungry or unclothed, 119. nor will you 
“ever” suffer from thirst or ‘the sun’s" heat.” [814 


The Temptation 
120. But Satan whispered to him, saying, “O Adam! Shall I show you the 
Tree of Immortality and a kingdom that does not fade away?” 121. So they 
both ate from the tree and then their nakedness was exposed to them, 
prompting them to cover themselves with leaves from Paradise. So Adam 


disobeyed his Lord, and "so` lost his way.!©5! 122. Then his Lord chose him 
"for His grace’, accepted his repentance, and guided him ‘rightly’. 


The Fall 

123. Allah said, “Descend, both of you, from here together "with Satan’ as 
enemies to each other. Then when guidance comes to you from Me, 
whoever follows My guidance will neither go astray ‘in this life’ nor suffer 
"in the next’. 124. But whoever turns away from My Reminder will 
certainly have a miserable life,'©1°! then We will raise them up blind on the 
Day of Judgment.” 125. They will cry, “My Lord! Why have you raised me 
up blind, although I used to see?” 126. Allah will respond, “It is so, just as 
Our revelations came to you and you neglected them, so Today you are 
neglected.” 127. This is how We reward whoever transgresses and does not 
believe in the revelations of their Lord. And the punishment of the 
Hereafter is far more severe and more lasting. 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 
128. Is it not yet clear to them how many peoples We destroyed before 
them, whose ruins they still pass by? Surely in this are signs for people of 
sound judgment. 129. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord!&Z! 
"O Prophet’ and a term already set, their ‘instant’ doom would have been 
inevitable. 


Advice to the Prophet 
130. So be patient "O Prophet’ with what they say. And glorify the praises 
of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset, and glorify Him in the hours 
of the night and at both ends of the day,!®48! so that you may be pleased 
“with the reward’. 131. Do not let your eyes crave what We have allowed 
some of the disbelievers to enjoy; the ‘fleeting’ splendour of this worldly 
life, which We test them with. But your Lord’s provision ‘in the Hereafter’ 
is far better and more lasting. 132. Bid your people to pray, and be diligent 
in ‘observing’ it. We do not ask you to provide. It is We Who provide for 
you. And the ultimate outcome is ‘only’ for ‘the people of" righteousness. 

Warning to the Pagans 
133. They demand, “If only he could bring us a sign from his Lord!”!&9! 
Have they not ‘already’ received a confirmation of what is in earlier 
Scriptures?!628! 134, Had We destroyed them with a torment before this 


"Prophet came’, they would have surely argued, “Our Lord! If only You had 
sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your revelations before being 
humiliated and put to shame.” 135. Say ‘to them, O Prophet’, “Each ‘of us’ 
is waiting, so keep waiting! You will soon know who is on the Straight Path 
and is ‘rightly’ guided.” 

kkk 


21. The Prophets 
(Al-Anbiya’) 


Like the previous surah, hibs is another Meccan stirah that aims at 
reassuring the Prophet ( .{z-{;) by reminding him of Allah’s grace and 
support to His prophet ding Abraham, Job, Jonah, Zachariah, and 
Jesus. The Prophet ( -{a-{<) is said to be sent as a mercy to the whole world 
(verse 107). Warnifgs“of the horrors of Judgment Day are dispersed 
throughout the sarah and are carried over to the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Indifference to the Truth 

1. "The time of" people’s judgment has drawn near, yet they are heedlessly 
turning away. 2. Whatever new reminder comes to them from their Lord, 
they only listen to it jokingly, 3. with their hearts ‘totally’ distracted. The 
evildoers would converse secretly, “saying,'’ “Is this ‘one’ not human like 
yourselves? Would you fall for ‘this’ witchcraft, even though you can 
‘clearly’ see?” 4. The Prophet responded, “My Lord ‘fully’ knows every 
word spoken in the heavens and the earth. For He is the All-Hearing, All- 
Knowing.” 5. Yet they say, “This "Quran" is a set of confused dreams! No, 
he has fabricated it! No, he must be a poet! So let him bring us a ‘tangible’ 
sign like those ‘prophets’ sent before.” 6. Not a ‘single’ society We 
destroyed before them ever believed ‘after receiving the signs’. Will these 
“pagans' then believe? 


Human, Not Angelic Messengers 
7. We did not send "messengers’* before you "O Prophet’ except mere men 
inspired by Us. If you ‘polytheists’ do not know ‘this already’, then ask 
those who have knowledge ‘of the Scriptures’. 8. We did not give those 
messengers ‘supernatural’ bodies that did not need food, nor were they 
immortal. 9. Then We fulfilled Our promise to them, saving them along 
with whoever We willed and destroying the transgressors. 


Reasoning with Meccan Pagans 


10. We have surely revealed to you a Book, in which there is glory for you. 
Will you not then understand? 11. ‘Imagine’ how many societies of 
wrongdoers We have destroyed, raising up other people after them! 12. 
When the wrongdoers sensed ‘the arrival of’ Our torment, they started to 
run away from their cities. 13. "They were told,’ “Do not run away! Return 
to your luxuries and your homes, so you may be questioned ‘about your 
fate’.” 14. They cried, “Woe to us! We have surely been wrongdoers.” 15. 
They kept repeating their cry until We mowed them down, ‘leaving them’ 
lifeless.!921! 


Divine Amusement? 

16. We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in between 
for sport. 17. Had We intended to take some’ amusement, We could have 
found it in Our presence, if that had been Our Will. 18. In fact, We hurl the 
truth against falsehood, leaving it crushed, and it quickly vanishes. And 
woe be to you for what you claim!!®22! 19, To Him belong all those in the 
heavens and the earth. And those nearest to Him are not too proud to 
worship Him, nor do they tire. 20. They glorify "Him" day and night, never 
wavering. 


False Gods 
21. Or have they taken gods from the earth, who can raise the dead? 22. 
Had there been other gods besides Allah in the heavens or the earth, both 
‘realms’ would have surely been corrupted. So Glorified is Allah, Lord of 
the Throne, far above what they claim. 23. He cannot be questioned about 
what He does, but they will ‘all’ be questioned. 24. Or have they taken other 
gods besides Him? Say, "O Prophet,’ “Show ‘me’ your proof. Here is ‘the 
Quran,’ the Reminder for those with me; along with ‘earlier Scriptures,’ the 
Reminder for those before me.”!®23! But most of them do not know the 
truth, so they turn away. 25. We never sent a messenger before you "O 
Prophet’ without revealing to him: “There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ 


1°99 


except Me, so worship Me ‘alone’. 


A Pagan Claim 
26. And they say, “The Most Compassionate has offspring!”'®“4! Glory be 
to Him! In fact, those ‘angels’ are only "His' honoured servants, 27. who do 
not speak until He has spoken, ‘only’ acting at His command. 28. He ‘fully’ 


knows what is ahead of them and what is behind them. They do not 
intercede except for whom He approves, and they tremble in awe of Him. 
29. Whoever of them were to say, “I am a god besides Him,” they would be 
rewarded with Hell by Us. This is how We reward the wrongdoers. 


Miracles in the Universe 

30. Do the disbelievers not realize that the heavens and earth were ‘once’ 
one mass then We split them apart?!®25! And We created from water every 
living thing. Will they not then believe? 31. And We have placed firm 
mountains upon the earth so it does not shake with them, and made in it 
broad pathways so they may find their way. 32. And We have made the sky 
a well-protected canopy, still they turn away from its signs.'®26! 33. And He 
is the One Who created the day and the night, the sun and the moon—each 
travelling in an orbit. 


Fleeting World 
34. We have not granted immortality to any human before you "O Prophet’: 
so if you die, will they live forever? 35. Every soul will taste death. And We 
test you "O humanity’ with good and evil as a trial, then to Us you will ‘all’ 
be returned. 


Warning to the Polytheists 

36. When the disbelievers see you "O Prophet’, they only make fun of you, 
‘saying,’ “Is this the one who speaks ‘ill’ of your gods?” while they 
disbelieve at the mention of the Most Compassionate. 37. Humankind is 
made of haste. I will soon show you My signs, so do not ask Me to hasten 
them. 38. They ask ‘the believers’, “When will this threat come to pass if 
what you say is true?” 39. If only the disbelievers knew that a time will 
come when they will not be able to keep the Fire off their faces or backs, 
nor will they be helped. 40. In fact, the Hour will take them by surprise, 
leaving them stunned. So they will not be able to avert it, nor will it be 
delayed from them. 41. ‘Other’ messengers had already been ridiculed 
before you "O Prophet’, but those who mocked them were overtaken by 
what they used to ridicule. 


Questions to the Pagans 
42. Ask "them, O Prophet,’ “Who can defend you by day or by night against 
the Most Compassionate?” Still they turn away from the remembrance of 


their Lord. 43. Or do they have gods—other than Us—that can protect 
them? They cannot ‘even’ protect themselves, nor will they be aided against 
Us. 44. In fact, We have allowed enjoyment for these "Meccans’ and their 
forefathers for such a long time ‘that they took it for granted’. Do they not 
see that We gradually reduce ‘their’ land from its borders? Is it they who 
will then prevail? 


Warning of Torment 
45. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I warn you only by revelation.” But the deaf cannot 
hear the call when they are warned! 46. If they were touched by even a 
breath of your Lord’s torment, they would certainly cry, “Woe to us! We 
have really been wrongdoers.” 


Divine Justice 
47. We will set up the scales of justice on the Day of Judgment, so no soul 
will be wronged in the least. And even’ if a deed is the weight of a mustard 
seed, We will bring it forth. And sufficient are We as a ‘vigilant’ Reckoner. 


The Torah 
48. Indeed, We granted Moses and Aaron the standard ‘to distinguish 
between right and wrong’—a light and a reminder for the righteous, 49. 
who are in awe of their Lord without seeing Him,!®2! and are fearful of the 
Hour. 


The Quran 
50. And this ‘Quran’ is a blessed reminder which We have revealed. Will 
you ‘pagans’ then deny it? 
Prophet Abraham 

51. And indeed, We had granted Abraham sound judgment early on, for We 
knew him well "to be worthy of it’. 52. "Remember’ when he questioned his 
father and his people, “What are these statues to which you are so 
devoted?” 53. They replied, “We found our forefathers worshipping them.” 
54. He responded, “Indeed, you and your forefathers have been clearly 
astray.” 55. They asked, “Have you come to us with the truth, or is this a 
joke?” 56. He replied, “In fact, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the 
earth, Who created them ‘both’. And to that I bear witness.” 57. “Then he 
said to himself,’ “By Allah! I will surely plot against your idols after you 


have turned your backs and gone away.” 58. So he smashed them into 
pieces, except the biggest of them, so they might turn to it "for answers’. 


His People’s Reaction 

59. They protested, “Who dared do this to our gods? It must be an 
evildoer!” 60. Some said, “We heard a young man, called Abraham, 
speaking ‘ill’ of them.” 61. They demanded, “Bring him before the eyes of 
the people, so that they may witness ‘his trial’.” 62. They asked, “Was it 
you who did this to our gods, O Abraham?” 63. He replied ‘sarcastically’, 
“No, this one—the biggest of them—did it! So ask them, if they can talk!” 
64. So they came back to their senses, saying ‘to one another’, “You 
yourselves are truly the wrongdoers!” 65. Then they ‘quickly’ regressed to 
their ‘original’ mind-set, ‘arguing,’ “You already know that those ‘idols’ 
cannot talk.” 66. He rebuked ‘them’, “Do you then worship—instead of 
Allah—what can neither benefit nor harm you in any way? 67. Shame on 
you and whatever you worship instead of Allah! Do you not have any 
sense?” 68. They concluded, “Burn him up to avenge your gods, if you 
must act.” 


Abraham Prevails 

69. We ordered, “O fire! Be cool and safe for Abraham!”!£22! 70. They had 
sought to harm him, but We made them the worst losers. 71. Then We 
delivered him, along with Lot, to the land We had showered with blessings 
for all people.'©22! 72. And We blessed him with Isaac ‘as a son" and Jacob 
"as a grandson’, as an additional favour—making all of them righteous. 73. 
We ‘also’ made them leaders, guiding by Our command, and inspired them 
to do good deeds, establish prayer, and pay alms-tax. And they were 
devoted to Our worship. 


Prophet Lot 
74. And to Lot We gave wisdom and knowledge, and delivered him from 
the society engrossed in shameful practices. They were certainly an evil, 
rebellious people. 75. And We admitted him into Our mercy, ‘for’ he was 
truly one of the righteous. 


Prophet Noah 
76. And ‘remember’ when Noah had cried out to Us earlier, so We 
responded to him and delivered him and his family'®22! from the great 


distress. 77. And We made him prevail over those who had rejected Our 
signs. They were truly an evil people, so We drowned them all. 


Prophet David and Prophet Solomon 

78. And ‘remember’ when David and Solomon passed judgment regarding 
the crops ruined ‘at night’ by someone’s sheep, and We were witness to 
their judgments. 79. We guided "young" Solomon to a fairer settlement,!92#! 
and granted each of them wisdom and knowledge. We subjected the 
mountains as well as the birds to hymn "Our praises’ along with David. It is 
We Who did ‘it all’. 80. We taught him the art of making body armour to 
protect you in battle. Will you then be grateful? 81. And to Solomon We 
subjected the raging winds, blowing by his command to the land We had 
showered with blessings. It is We Who know everything. 82. And "We 
subjected" some jinn'®22! that dived for him,'®22! and performed other duties. 
It is We Who kept them in check. 


Prophet Job 
83. And ‘remember’ when Job cried out to his Lord, “I have been touched 
with adversity, |9341 and You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.” 84. So 
We answered his prayer and removed his adversity, and gave him back his 
family, twice as many, as a mercy from Us and a lesson for the ‘devoted’ 
worshippers. 
More Prophets 

85. And ‘remember’ Ishmael, Enoch, and Zul-Kifl.'©°5! They were all 
steadfast. 86. We admitted them into Our mercy, for they were truly of the 
righteous. 


Prophet Jonah 
87. And ‘remember’ when the Man of the Whale stormed off ‘from his city’ 
in a rage, thinking We would not restrain him.'®26! Then in the ‘veils of" 
darkness!®22! he cried out, “There is no god "worthy of worship" except You. 
Glory be to You! I have certainly done wrong.” 88. So We answered his 
prayer and rescued him from anguish. And so do We save the ‘true’ 
believers. 


Prophet Zachariah 
89. And ‘remember’ when Zachariah cried out to his Lord, “My Lord! Do 
not leave me childless, though You are the Best of Successors.” 928! 90. So 


We answered his prayer, granted him John, and made his wife fertile. 
Indeed, they used to race in doing good, and call upon Us with hope and 
fear, totally humbling themselves before Us. 


Prophet Jesus and His Mother 
91. And ‘remember’ the one who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into 
her through Our angel, "Gabriel, !839] making her and her son a sign for all 
peoples. 


One Way 
92. "O prophets!" Indeed, this religion of yours is ‘only’ one, and I am your 
Lord, so worship Me ‘alone’. 93. Yet the people have divided it into sects. 
But to Us they will all return. 94. So whoever does good and is a believer 
will never be denied ‘the reward for’ their striving, for We are recording it 
all. 


The People of Hell 

95. It is impossible for a society which We have destroyed to ever rise 
again, 96. until “after’ Gog and Magog have broken loose ‘from the barrier’, 
[640] swarming down from every hill, 97. ushering in the True Promise.!§4!! 
Then—behold!—the disbelievers will stare "in horror, crying,’ “Oh, woe to 
us! We have truly been heedless of this. In fact, we have been wrongdoers.” 
98. Certainly you ‘disbelievers’ and whatever you worship instead of Allah 
will be the fuel of Hell.'©42! You are “all” bound to enter it. 99. Had those 
idols been ‘true’ gods, they would not have entered it. And they will be 
there forever. 100. In it they will groan, and will not be able to hear. 


The People of Paradise 

101. Surely those for whom We have destined the finest reward will be kept 
far away from Hell, 102. not even hearing the slightest hissing from it. And 
they will delight forever in what their souls desire. 103. The Supreme 
Horror ‘of that Day’ will not disturb them, and the angels will greet them, 
‘saying, “This is your Day, which you have been promised.” 104. On that 
Day We will roll up the heavens like a scroll of writings. Just as We 
produced the first creation, "so` shall We reproduce it. That is a promise 
binding on Us. We truly uphold "Our promises"! 105. Surely, following the 
"heavenly’ Record, We decreed in the Scriptures: “My righteous servants 
shall inherit the land.”!©43! 


Advice for the Prophet 
106. Surely this ‘Quran’ is sufficient "as a reminder’ for those devoted to 
worship. 107. We have sent you "O Prophet’ only as a mercy for the whole 
world. 108. Say, “What has been revealed to me is this: ‘Your God is only 
One God.’ Will you then submit?” 109. If they turn away, then say, “I have 
warned you all equally. I do not know if what you are threatened with is 
near or far. 110. Allah surely knows what you say openly and whatever you 
hide. 111. I do not know if this ‘delay’ is possibly a test for you and an 
enjoyment for a while.” 112. "In the end,’ the Prophet said, “My Lord! 
Judge "between us’ in truth. And our Lord is the Most Compassionate, 
Whose help is sought against what you claim.”!©4! 
kkk 


22. The Pilgrimage 
(AL- Hajj) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name from the passage that talks about 
pilgrimage rituals (verses 25-37), along with condemnations to the pagans 
for hindering the believers from reaching the Sacred House in Mecca. After 
fifteen years of persecution, here the believers receive the permission to 
fight back in self-defence (verse 39). Idolatry is condemned and the idols 
are rejected as pathetic, incapable of even creating a fly. In conclusion, the 
believers are told that they can achieve success through prayer and good 
deeds—a theme which extends to the beginning of the next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Horror of Judgment Day 
1. O humanity! Fear your Lord, for the ‘violent’ quaking at the Hour is 
surely a dreadful thing. 2. The Day you see it, every nursing mother will 
abandon what she is nursing, and every pregnant woman will deliver her 
burden ‘prematurely’. And you will see people ‘as if they were’ drunk, 
though they will not be drunk; but the torment of Allah is ‘terribly’ severe. 
Denying Allah’s Might 

3. ‘Still’ there are some who dispute about Allah without knowledge, and 
follow every rebellious devil. 4. It has been decreed for such devils that 
whoever takes them as a guide will be misguided and led by them into the 
torment of the Blaze. 


Allah’s Power to Create 
5. O humanity! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, then "know that’ 
We did create you'®2! from dust, then from a sperm-drop,'®®! then 
"developed you into’ a clinging clot "of blood’,!©2! then a lump of flesh'®42! 
— fully formed or unformed!'2!—in order to demonstrate "Our power" to 
you. "Then" We settle whatever "embryo" We will in the womb for an 
appointed term, then bring you forth as infants, so that you may reach your 
prime. Some of you ‘may’ die ‘young’, while others are left to reach the 
most feeble stage of life so that they may know nothing after having known 


much. And you see the earth lifeless, but as soon as We send down rain 
upon it, it begins to stir "to life’ and swell, producing every type of pleasant 
plant. 6. That is because Allah ‘alone’ is the Truth, He ‘alone’ gives life to 
the dead, and He ‘alone’ is Most Capable of everything. 7. And certainly the 
Hour is coming, there is no doubt about it. And Allah will surely resurrect 
those in the graves. 


Punishment of the Wicked 
8. ‘Still’ there are some who dispute about Allah without knowledge, 
guidance, or an enlightening scripture, 9. turning away ‘in pride’ to lead 
others’ astray from Allah’s Way. They will suffer disgrace in this world, 
and on the Day of Judgment We will make them taste the torment of 
burning. 10. "They will be told,’ “This is ‘the reward" for what your hands 
have done. And Allah is never unjust to “His’ creation.” 


Half-Hearted Worship 

11. And there are some who worship Allah on the verge ‘of faith’: if they 
are blessed with something good, they are content with it; but if they are 
afflicted with a trial, they relapse “into disbelief’,!2! losing this world and 
the Hereafter. That is ‘truly’ the clearest loss. 12. They call besides Allah 
what can neither harm nor benefit them. That is "truly’` the farthest one can 
stray. 13. They invoke those whose worship leads to harm, not benefit. 
What an evil patron and what an evil associate! 


Reward of True Believers 
14. Indeed, Allah will admit those who believe and do good into Gardens, 
under which rivers flow. Surely Allah does what He wills. 


A Challenge to the Cynics 
15. Whoever thinks that Allah will not help His Prophet in this world and 
the Hereafter, let them stretch out a rope to the ceiling and strangle 
themselves, then let them see if this plan will do away with ‘the cause of" 
their rage. '851] 

The Sole Guide and Judge 
16. And so We revealed this “Quran’ as clear verses. And Allah certainly 
guides whoever He wills. 17. Indeed, the believers, Jews, Sabians, 252! 
Christians, Magi,'©°2! and the polytheists—Allah will judge between them 
‘all’ on Judgment Day. Surely Allah is a Witness over all things. 


Submission to the Almighty 
18. Do you not see that to Allah bow down ‘in submission all those in 
the heavens and all those on the earth, as well as the sun, the moon, the 
stars, the mountains, the trees, and ‘all’ living beings, as well as many 
humans, while many are deserving of punishment. And whoever Allah 
disgraces, none can honour. Surely Allah does what He wills. 


[654] 


The Believers and Disbelievers 
19. These are two opposing groups that disagree about their Lord: as for the 
disbelievers, garments of Fire will be cut out for them and boiling water 
will be poured over their heads, 20. melting whatever is in their bellies, 
along with their skin. 21. And awaiting them are maces of iron. 22. 
Whenever they try to escape from Hell—out of anguish—they will be 
forced back into it, ‘and will be told,’ “Taste the torment of burning!” 23. 
"But Allah will surely admit those who believe and do good into Gardens, 
under which rivers flow, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold 
and pearls, and their clothing will be silk, 24. for they have been guided to 


the best of speech, and they have been guided to the Commendable Path. 
[655] 


Violating the Sacred Mosque!®51. 
25. Indeed, those who persist in disbelief and hinder ‘others’ from the Way 
of Allah and from the Sacred Mosque!®Z!—which We have appointed for 
all people, residents and visitors alike—along with whoever intends to 
deviate by doing wrong in it,'®°8) We will cause them to taste a painful 
punishment. 
The Pilgrimage 

26. And ‘remember’ when We assigned to Abraham the site of the House, 
“saying, “Do not associate anything with Me ‘in worship’ and purify My 
House for those who circle ‘the Ka’bah’, stand ‘in prayer’, and bow and 
prostrate themselves. 27. Call ‘all’ people to the pilgrimage.'2! They will 
come to you on foot and on every lean camel from every distant path, 28. so 
they may obtain the benefits ‘in store’ for them,'®2! and pronounce the 
Name of Allah on appointed days over the sacrificial animals He has 
provided for them. So eat from their meat and feed the desperately poor. 29. 


Then let them groom themselves,'S©4) fulfil their vows, and circle the 
Ancient House.” 


Total Devotion to Allah 

30. That is so. And whoever honours the rituals of Allah, it is best for them 
in the sight of their Lord. The ‘meat of" cattle has been made lawful for you, 
except what has “already” been recited to you.'®52! So shun the impurity of 
idolatry, and shun words of falsehood. 31. Be upright "in devotion’ to Allah, 
associating none with Him ‘in worship’. For whoever associates ‘others’ 
with Allah is like someone who has fallen from the sky and is either 
snatched away by birds or swept by the wind to a remote place. 32. That is 
so. And whoever honours the symbols of Allah, it is certainly out of the 
piety of the heart. 33. You may benefit from sacrificial animals for an 
appointed term,!®®2! then their place of sacrifice is at the Ancient House. 


Good News for the Humble 

34. For every community We appointed a rite of sacrifice so that they may 
pronounce the Name of Allah over the sacrificial animals He has provided 
for them. For your God is only One God, so submit yourselves to Him 
‘alone’. And give good news "O Prophet’ to the humble: 35. those whose 
hearts tremble at the remembrance of Allah, who patiently endure whatever 
may befall them, and who establish prayer and donate from what We have 
provided for them. 


Purpose of Sacrificial Animals 

36. We have made sacrificial camels ‘and cattle’ among the symbols of 
Allah, in which there is "much" good for you. So pronounce the Name of 
Allah over them when they are lined up ‘for sacrifice’. Once they have 
fallen ‘lifeless’ on their sides, you may eat from their meat, and feed the 
needy—those who do not beg, and those who do. In this way We have 
subjected these ‘animals’ to you so that you may be grateful. 37. Neither 
their meat nor blood reaches Allah. Rather, it is your piety that reaches 
Him. This is how He has subjected them to you so that you may proclaim 
the greatness of Allah for what He has guided you to, and give good news 
to the good-doers. 


Permission to Fight in Self-Defence 


38. Indeed, Allah defends those who believe. Surely Allah does not like 
whoever is deceitful, ungrateful. 39. Permission ‘to fight back’ is "hereby’ 
granted to those being fought, for they have been wronged.'©4! And Allah 
is truly Most Capable of helping them ‘prevail’. 40. "They are’ those who 
have been expelled from their homes for no reason other than proclaiming: 
“Our Lord is Allah.” Had Allah not repelled ‘the aggression of’ some 
people by means of others, destruction would have surely claimed 
monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which Allah’s Name is 
often mentioned. Allah will certainly help those who stand up for Him. 
Allah is truly All-Powerful, Almighty. 41. "They are’ those who, if 
established in the land by Us, would perform prayer, pay alms-tax, 
encourage what is good, and forbid what is evil. And with Allah rests the 
outcome of all affairs. 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 

42. If they deny you "O Prophet’, so did the people of Noah before them, as 
well as ‘the tribes of’ Ad and Thamûd, 43. the people of Abraham, the 
people of Lot, 44. and the residents of Midian. And Moses was denied ‘too’. 
But I delayed ‘the fate of" the disbelievers “until their appointed time’ then 
seized them. And how severe was My response! 45. Many are the societies 
We have destroyed for persisting in wrongdoing, leaving them in total ruin. 
"Many are’ also the abandoned wells and lofty palaces! 46. Have they not 
travelled throughout the land so their hearts may reason, and their ears may 
listen? Indeed, it is not the eyes that are blind, but it is the hearts in the 
chests that grow blind. 47. They challenge you "O Prophet’ to hasten the 
torment. And Allah will never fail in His promise. But a day with your Lord 
is indeed like a thousand years by your counting. 48. Many are the societies 
whose end We delayed while they did wrong, then seized them. And to Me 
is the final return. 


The Prophet’s Duty 
49. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O humanity! I am only sent to you with a clear 
warning. 50. So those who believe and do good will have forgiveness and 
an honourable provision. 51. But those who strive to discredit Our 
revelations, they will be the residents of the Hellfire.” 


Satan’s Influence 


52. Whenever We sent a messenger or a prophet before you "O Prophet’ and 
he recited “Our revelations’, Satan would influence "people’s understanding 
of" his recitation. But ‘eventually’ Allah would eliminate Satan’s influence. 
Then Allah would ‘firmly’ establish His revelations. And Allah is All- 
Knowing, All-Wise. 53. All that so He may make Satan’s influence a trial 
for those ‘hypocrites’ whose hearts are sick and those ‘disbelievers’ whose 
hearts are hardened. Surely the wrongdoers are totally engrossed in 
opposition. 54. "This is’ also so that those gifted with knowledge would 
know that this ‘revelation’ is the truth from your Lord, so they have faith in 
it, and so their hearts would submit humbly to it. And Allah surely guides 
the believers to the Straight Path. 55. Yet the disbelievers will persist in 
doubt about this ‘revelation’ until the Hour takes them by surprise, or the 
torment of a terminating!®®! Day comes to them. 


Justice on Judgment Day 

56. All authority on that Day is for Allah ‘alone’.'®55! He will judge between 
them. So those who believe and do good will be in the Gardens of Bliss. 57. 
But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, it is they who will 
suffer a humiliating punishment. 58. As for those who emigrate in the cause 
of Allah and then are martyred or die, Allah will indeed grant them a good 
provision. Surely Allah is the Best Provider. 59. He will certainly admit 
them into a place they will be pleased with. For Allah is truly All-Knowing, 
Most Forbearing. 


Divine Justice 
60. That is so. And whoever retaliates in equivalence to the injury they have 
received, and then are wronged ‘again’, Allah will certainly help them. 
Surely Allah is Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving. 


Allah’s Power 
61. That is because Allah causes the night to merge into the day, and the 
day into the night. Indeed, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 62. That is 
because Allah ‘alone’ is the Truth and what they invoke besides Him is 
falsehood, and Allah ‘alone’ is truly the Most High, All-Great. 63. Do you 
not see that Allah sends down rain from the sky, then the earth becomes 
green? Surely Allah is Most Subtle, All-Aware. 64. To Him belongs 


whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Allah ‘alone’ is 
truly the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. 


Allah’s Grace 
65. Do you not see that Allah has subjected to you!®®2! whatever is in the 
earth as well as the ships ‘that’ sail through the sea by His command? He 
keeps the sky from falling down on the earth except by His permission. 
Surely Allah is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to humanity. 66. And He 
is the One Who gave you life, then will cause you to die, and then will 
bring you back to life. "But" surely humankind is ever ungrateful. 


One Message, Different Laws 

67. For every community We appointed a code!®8! of life to follow.'®2! So 
do not let them dispute with you "O Prophet’ in this matter. And invite ‘all’ 
to your Lord, for you are truly on the Right Guidance. 68. But if they argue 
with you, then say, “Allah knows best what you do.” 69. Allah will judge 
between you ‘all’ on Judgment Day regarding your differences. 70. Do you 
not know that Allah ‘fully’ knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth? 
Surely it is all ‘written’ in a Record. That is certainly easy for Allah. 


Almighty Allah or False Gods? 

71. Yet they worship besides Allah that for which He has sent down no 
authority, and of which they have no knowledge. The wrongdoers will have 
no helper. 72. Whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, you "O 
Prophet’ recognize rage on the faces of the disbelievers, as if they are going 
to snap at those who recite Our revelations to them. Say, “Shall I inform 
you of something far more enraging than that? ‘It is’ the Fire with which 
Allah has threatened those who disbelieve. What an evil destination!” 


The Fly Challenge 
73. O humanity! A lesson is set forth, so listen to it ‘carefully’: those ‘idols’ 
you invoke besides Allah can never create "so much as’ a fly, even if they 
“all” were to come together for that. And if a fly were to snatch anything 
away from them, they cannot "even’ retrieve it from the fly. How powerless 
are those who invoke and those invoked!!®“°! 74, They have not shown 
Allah the reverence He deserves. Surely Allah is All-Powerful, Almighty. 


Divine Choice 


75. Allah selects messengers from both angels and people, for Allah is truly 
All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 76. He knows what is ahead of them and what is 
behind them. And to Allah ‘all’ matters will be returned "for judgment’. 


Advice to the Believers 
77. O believers! Bow down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and 
do ‘what is’ good so that you may be successful. 78. Strive for "the cause of" 
Allah in the way He deserves, for ‘it is‘ He "Who’ has chosen you, and laid 
upon you no hardship in the religion—the way of your forefather Abraham. 
"It is Allah” Who named you ‘the ones who submit’!®24! "in the’ earlier 
Scriptures’ and in this "Quran’, so that the Messenger may be a witness 
Over you, and that you may be witnesses over humanity. So establish prayer, 
pay alms-tax, and hold fast to Allah. He ‘alone’ is your Guardian. What an 
excellent Guardian, and what an excellent Helper! 

kk 


23. The Believers 
(Al-Mu'minin) 


This Meccan sûrah emphasizes that the believers are guaranteed success 
(verse 1), whereas the disbelievers are bound to fail (verse 117). Like the 
previous stirah, it makes the case for Allah’s oneness as well as His power 
to create and resurrect. The last part is dedicated to the judgment of the 
believers and the disbelievers, focusing on the fate of the wicked who abuse 
the believers. This theme extends to the next strah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The True Believers 

1. Successful indeed are the believers: 2. those who humble themselves in 
prayer; 3. those who avoid idle talk; 4. those who pay alms-tax;!®22! 5. those 
who guard their chastity!®2! 6. except with their wives or those 
"bondwomen’ in their possession, | £24! for then they are free from blame, 7. 
but whoever seeks beyond that are the transgressors; 8. "the believers are 
also’ those who are true to their trusts and covenants; 9. and those who are 
properly’ observant of their prayers. 10. These are the ones who will be 
awarded 11. Paradise as their own.!®25! They will be there forever. 


The Creation of Humans 

12. And indeed, We created humankind!£2! from an extract of clay, 13. then 
placed each “human” as a sperm-drop!®2! in a secure place, 14. then We 
developed the drop into a clinging clot ‘of blood’, then developed the clot 
into a lump ‘of flesh’, then developed the lump into bones, then clothed the 
bones with flesh, then We brought it into being as a new creation.!®28! So 
Blessed is Allah, the Best of Creators. 15. After that you will surely die, 16. 
then on the Day of Judgment you will be resurrected. 


Allah’s Power 
17. And indeed, We created above you seven levels ‘of heaven’. We are 
never unmindful of ‘Our’ creation. 18. We send down rain from the sky in 
perfect measure, causing it to soak into the earth. And We are surely able to 
take it away. 19. With it We produce for you gardens of palm trees and 


grapevines, in which there are abundant fruits, and from which you may eat, 
20. as well as ‘olive’ trees which grow at Mount Sinai, providing oil and a 
condiment to eat. 21. And there is certainly a lesson for you in cattle, from 
whose bellies We give you ‘milk’ to drink, and in them are many other 
benefits for you, and from them you may eat. 22. And you are carried upon 
"some of’ them and upon ships. 


Prophet Noah 

23. Indeed, We sent Noah to his people. He declared, “O my people! 
Worship Allah ‘alone’. You have no god other than Him. Will you not then 
fear Him?” 24. But the disbelieving chiefs of his people said ‘to the 
masses’, “This is only a human like you, who wants to be superior to you. 
Had Allah willed, He could have easily sent down angels ‘instead’. We have 
never heard of this in ‘the history of’ our forefathers. 25. He is simply 
insane, so bear with him for a while.”!£22! 


The Flood 

26. Noah prayed, “My Lord! Help me, because they have denied "me’.” 27. 
So We inspired him: “Build the Ark under Our ‘watchful’ Eyes and 
directions. Then when Our command comes and the oven bursts ‘with 
water’,!80l take on board a pair from every species along with your family 
—except those against whom the decree ‘to drown’ has already been 
passed. And do not plead with Me for those who have done wrong, for they 
will surely be drowned.” 28. Then when you and those with you have 
settled in the Ark, say, “All praise is for Allah, Who saved us from the 
wrongdoing people.” 29. And pray, “My Lord! Allow me a blessed landing, 
for You are the best accommodator.” 30. Surely in this are lessons.!4! And 
We ‘always’ put ‘people’ to the test. 


Prophet Hiid!§821 
31. Then We raised another generation after them, 32. and sent to them a 
messenger from among themselves, ‘declaring,’ “Worship Allah ‘alone’. 
You have no god other than Him. Will you not then fear ‘Him”?” 33. But the 
chiefs of his people—who disbelieved, denied the meeting ‘with Allah’ in 
the Hereafter, and were spoiled by the worldly luxuries We had provided for 
them—-said "to the masses’, “This is only a human like you. He eats what 
you eat, and drinks what you drink. 34. And if you "ever' obey a human like 


yourselves, then you would certainly be losers. 35. Does he promise you 
that once you are dead and reduced to dust and bones, you will be brought 
forth ‘alive’? 36. Impossible, simply impossible is what you are promised! 
37. There is nothing beyond our worldly life. We die, others are born, and 
none will be resurrected. 38. He is no more than a man who has fabricated a 
lie about Allah, and we will never believe in him.” 


The Blast 
39. The messenger prayed, “My Lord! Help me, because they have denied 
"me’.” 40. Allah responded, “Soon they will be truly regretful.” 41. Then 
the ‘mighty’ blast overtook them with justice, and We reduced them to 
rubble. So away with the wrongdoing people! 


More Prophets 
42. Then We raised other generations after them. 43. No people can 
advance their doom, nor can they delay it. 44. Then We sent Our 
messengers in succession: whenever a messenger came to his people, they 
denied him. So We destroyed them, one after the other, reducing them to 
cautionary’ tales. So away with the people who refuse to believe! 


Prophet Moses and Prophet Aaron 
45. Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs'®83! and 
compelling proof 46. to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they behaved arrogantly 
and were a tyrannical people. 47. They argued, “Will we believe in two 
humans, like ourselves, whose people are slaves to us?” 48. So they rejected 
them both, and ‘so’ were among those destroyed. 49. And We certainly gave 
Moses the Scripture, so perhaps his people would be ‘rightly’ guided. 


Prophet Jesus and His Mother 
50. And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and gave them 
refuge on high ground—a ‘suitable’ place for rest with flowing water. 


One Way 
51. O messengers! Eat from what is good and lawful, and act righteously. 
Indeed, I fully know what you do. 52. Surely this religion of yours is ‘only’ 
one, and I am your Lord, so fear Me ‘alone’. 53. Yet the people have 
divided it into different sects, each rejoicing in what they have. 54. So leave 
them "O Prophet’ in their heedlessness for a while. 55. Do they think, since 


We provide them with wealth and children, 56. that We hasten to ‘honour’ 
them ‘with’ all kinds of good? No! They are not aware. 


The True Believers 

57. Surely those who tremble in awe of their Lord, 58. and who believe in 
the revelations of their Lord, 59. and who associate none with their Lord, 
60. and who do whatever ‘good’ they do with their hearts fearful, "knowing" 
that they will return to their Lord!®84!— 61. it is they who race to do good 
deeds, always taking the lead. 62. We never require of any soul more than 
what it can afford. And with Us is a record which speaks the truth. None 
will be wronged. 


The Disbelievers 

63. But the hearts of those "who disbelieve’ are oblivious to ‘all of" this, 
and they have other ‘evil’ deeds, opposite to this, in which they are 
engrossed. 64. But as soon as We seize their elite with torment, they start to 
cry for help. 65. "They will be told,’ “Do not cry for help today. Surely you 
will never be saved from Us. 66. Indeed, My revelations were recited to 
you, but you used to back away ‘in disgust’, 67. boasting of the Sacred 
House, and babbling ‘nonsense about the Quran’ by night.” 


Why the Denial? 

68. Is it because they have never contemplated the Word ‘of Allah"? Or 
"because" there has come to them something that did not come to their 
forefathers? 69. Or "because" they failed to recognize their Messenger, and 
so they denied him? 70. Or "because’ they say, “He is insane?” In fact, he 
has come to them with the truth, but most of them are resentful of the truth. 
71. Had the truth followed their desires,'®8@! the heavens, the earth, and all 
those in them would have certainly been corrupted. In fact, We have 
brought them ‘the means to’ their glory, but they turn away from it. 72. Or 
"is it because’ you "O Prophet’ are asking them for tribute? But the reward 
of your Lord is best, for He is the Best Provider. 73. And surely you are 
calling them to the Straight Path, 74. but those who disbelieve in the 
Hereafter are certainly deviating from that Path. 


[685] 


Those Persisting in Denial 
75. "Even’ if We had mercy on them and removed their affliction,'®82! they 
would still persist in their transgression, wandering blindly. 76. And We 


have already seized them with torment, but they never humbled themselves 
to their Lord, nor did they "submissively’ appeal ‘to Him’. 77. But as soon 
as We open for them a gate of severe punishment, they will be utterly 
desperate. 


Ingratitude to the Almighty 

78. He is the One Who created for you hearing, sight, and intellect. ‘Yet’ 
you hardly give any thanks. 79. And He is the One Who has dispersed you 
‘all’ over the earth, and to Him you will ‘all’ be gathered. 80. And He is the 
One Who gives life and causes death, and to Him belongs the alternation of 
the day and night. Will you not then understand? 81. But they ‘just’ say 
what their predecessors said. 82. They said, “Once we are dead and reduced 
to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected? 83. We have already been 
promised this, as well as our forefathers earlier. This is nothing but ancient 
fables!” 


Almighty Allah 

84. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “To whom belong the earth and all those on it, if 
you ‘really’ know?” 85. They will reply, “To Allah!” Say, “Why are you not 
then mindful?” 86. ‘And’ ask ‘them’, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens 
and the Lord of the Mighty Throne?” 87. They will reply, “Allah.” Say, 
“Will you not then fear "Him”?” 88. Ask "them also,’ “In Whose Hands is 
the authority over all things, protecting ‘all’ while none can protect against 
Him, if you ‘really’ know?” 89. They will reply, “Allah.” Say, “How are 
you then so deluded?” 90. In fact, We have brought them the truth, and they 
are certainly liars. 


One True God 
91. Allah has never had ‘any’ offspring, nor is there any god besides Him. 
Otherwise, each god would have taken away what he created, and they 
would have tried to dominate one another. Glorified is Allah above what 
they claim! 92. "He is the’ Knower of the seen and unseen. Exalted is He 
above what they associate ‘with Him’. 
Advice to the Prophet 

93. Say, "O Prophet,’ “My Lord! Should You show me what they!88! are 
threatened with, 94. then, my Lord, do not count me among the wrongdoing 
people.” 95. We are indeed able to show you what We have threatened them 


with. 96. Respond to evil with what is best. We know well what they claim. 
[6891 97, And say, “My Lord! I seek refuge in You from the temptations of 
the devils. 98. And I seek refuge in You, my Lord, that they ‘even’ come 
near me.” 


Too Late for the Wicked 
99. When death approaches any of them, they cry, “My Lord! Let me go 
back, 100. so I may do good in what I left behind.” Never! It is only a 
useless’ appeal they make. And there is a barrier behind them until the Day 
they are resurrected. !820 


Judgment Day 
101. Then, when the Trumpet will be blown,'®2#! there will be no kinship 
between them on that Day, nor will they ‘even care to’ ask about one 
another, 22! 


The Successful Ones 
102. As for those whose scale is heavy "with good deeds’, it is they who 
will be successful. 


The Losers 
103. But those whose scale is light, they will have doomed themselves, 
staying in Hell forever. 104. The Fire will burn their faces, leaving them 
deformed. 105. "Tt will be said,’ “Were My revelations not recited to you, 
but you used to deny them?” 106. They will cry, “Our Lord! Our ill-fate 
took hold of us, so we became a misguided people. 107. Our Lord! Take us 
out of this "Fire". Then if we ever return ‘to denial’, we will truly be 
wrongdoers.” 108. Allah will respond, “Be despised in there! Do not ‘ever’ 
plead with Me ‘again"! 109. Indeed, there was a group of My servants who 
used to pray, ‘Our Lord! We have believed, so forgive us and have mercy 
on us, for You are the best of those who show mercy,’ 110. but you were "so 
busy" making fun of them that it made you forget My remembrance. And 
you used to laugh at them. 111. Today I have indeed rewarded them for their 
perseverance: they are certainly the triumphant.” 
Fleeting World 

112. He will ask ‘them’, “How many years did you remain on earth?” 113. 
They will reply, “We remained ‘only’ a day or part of a day.!§°3! But ask 
those who kept count.” 114. He will say, “You only remained for a little 


while, if only you knew. 115. Did you then think that We had created you 
without purpose, and that you would never be returned to Us?” 


One God Only 
116. Exalted is Allah, the True King! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ 
except Him, the Lord of the Honourable Throne. 117. Whoever invokes, 
besides Allah, another god—for which they can have no proof—they will 
surely find their penalty with their Lord. Indeed, the disbelievers will never 
succeed. 


Advice to the Prophet 
118. Say, "O Prophet,’ “My Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for You are the 
best of those who show mercy.” 
kk 


24. The Light 
(An-Nir) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name from the divine light mentioned in 
verses 35-36. A large portion of this sûrah deals with the issue of sexual 
misconduct hinted at in the previous sûrah (23:7). The sûrah also offers 
some guidelines to the believers on how they should have reacted to false 
rumours against ’Aishah, the Prophet’s wife. Other issues are discussed, 
including modesty, entering people’s homes, forced prostitution, hypocrisy, 
and false accusations of adultery. Allah‘spgwer, compliance with His 
judgment, and obedience to the Prophet ( Ae) are highly emphasized. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Introduction 
1. ‘This is’ a sûrah which We have revealed and made ‘its rulings’ 
obligatory, and revealed in it clear commandments so that you may be 
mindful. 


Punishment for Fornication 
2. As for female and male fornicators, give each of them one hundred 
lashes,'©4! and do not let pity for them make you lenient in “enforcing” the 
law of Allah, if you ‘truly’ believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a 
number of believers witness their punishment. 


Like for Like 
3. A male fornicator would only marry a female fornicator or idolatress. 
And a female fornicator would only be married to a fornicator or idolater. 
This is “all” forbidden to the believers.!£25! 


Unsupported Accusations 
4. Those who accuse chaste women ‘of adultery’ and fail to produce four 
witnesses, give them eighty lashes ‘each’. And do not ever accept any 
testimony from them—for they are indeed the rebellious— 5. except those 
who repent afterwards and mend their ways, then surely Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Accusation to One’s Wife 
6. And those who accuse their wives ‘of adultery’ but have no witness 
except themselves, the accuser must testify,'®°5! swearing four times by 
Allah that he is telling the truth, 7. and a fifth oath that Allah may condemn 
him if he is lying. 8. For her to be spared the punishment, she must swear 
four times by Allah that he is telling a lie, 9. and a fifth oath that Allah may 
be displeased with her if he is telling the truth.'©22! 10. "You would have 
suffered,’ had it not been for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, and had 
Allah not been Accepting of Repentance, All-Wise. 


Those Who Slandered the Prophet’s Wife!®28!. 
11. Indeed, those who came up with that ‘outrageous’ slander are a group of 
you. Do not think this is bad for you. Rather, it is good for you.'©2! They 
will be punished, each according to their share of the sin. As for their 
mastermind,'22! he will suffer a tremendous punishment. 


How the Believers Should Have Reacted 

12. If only the believing men and women had thought well of one another, 
when you heard this ‘rumour’, and said, “This is clearly ‘an outrageous’ 
slander!” 13. Why did they not produce four witnesses? Now, since they 
have failed to produce witnesses, they are ‘truly’ liars in the sight of Allah. 
14. Had it not been for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you in this world and 
the Hereafter, you would have certainly been touched with a tremendous 
punishment for what you plunged into— 15. when you passed it from one 
tongue to the other, and said with your mouths what you had no knowledge 
of, taking it lightly while it is “extremely” serious in the sight of Allah. 16. If 
only you had said upon hearing it, “How can we speak about such a thing! 
Glory be to You "O Lord"! This is a heinous slander!” 17. Allah forbids you 
from ever doing something like this again, if you are ‘true’ believers. 18. 
And Allah makes ‘His' commandments clear to you, for Allah is All- 
Knowing, All-Wise. 


Warning to Slanderers 
19. Indeed, those who love to see indecency spread among the believers 
will suffer a painful punishment in this life and the Hereafter. Allah knows 
and you do not know. 20. "You would have suffered,’ had it not been for 


Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, and had Allah not been Ever Gracious, 
Most Merciful. 


Warning Against Satan 
21. O believers! Do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows 
Satan’s footsteps, then ‘let them know that’ he surely bids ‘all to’ 
immorality and wickedness. Had it not been for Allah’s grace and mercy 
upon you, none of you would have ever been purified. But Allah purifies 
whoever He wills. And Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Uninterrupted Kindness 
22. Do not let the people of virtue and affluence among you swear to 
suspend donations to their relatives, the needy, and the emigrants in the 
cause of Allah. Let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love to be forgiven 
by Allah? And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.!224! 


Punishment of the Slanderers 
23. Surely those who accuse chaste, unsuspecting,'22! believing women are 
cursed in this life and the Hereafter. And they will suffer a tremendous 
punishment 24. on the Day their tongues, hands, and feet will testify against 
them for what they used to do. 25. On that Day, Allah will give them their 
just penalty in full, and they will ‘come to’ know that Allah ‘alone’ is the 
Ultimate Truth. 


Birds of a Feather ... 
26. Wicked women are for wicked men, and wicked men are for wicked 
women. And virtuous women are for virtuous men, and virtuous men are 
for virtuous women. The virtuous are innocent of what the wicked say. 
They will have forgiveness and an honourable provision.!222! 


Entering People’s Homes 
27. O believers! Do not enter any house other than your own until you have 
asked for permission and greeted its occupants. This is best for you, so 
perhaps you will be mindful. 28. If you find no one at home, do not enter it 
until you have been given permission. And if you are asked to leave, then 
leave. That is purer for you. And Allah has "perfect’ knowledge of what you 
do. 


Entering Public Places 


29. There is no blame on you if you enter public places!2°4! where there is 
something of benefit for you. And Allah knows what you reveal and what 
you conceal. 


Advice to Muslim Men 
30. "O Prophet!" Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their 
chastity. That is purer for them. Surely Allah is All-Aware of what they do. 


Advice to Muslim Women 

31. And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their 
chastity, and not to reveal their adomments!222! except what normally 
appears.!295! Let them draw their veils over their chests, and not reveal their 
“hidden” adornments!222! except to their husbands, their fathers, their 
fathers-in-law, their sons, their stepsons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons 
or sisters’ sons, their fellow women, those "bondwomen’ in their 
possession, male attendants with no desire, or children who are still 
unaware of women’s nakedness. Let them not stomp their feet, drawing 
attention to their hidden adornments. Turn to Allah in repentance all 
together, O believers, so that you may be successful. 


Advice to Guardians 
32. Marry off the ‘free’ singles among you, as well as the righteous of your 
bondmen and bondwomen. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them out of 
His bounty. For Allah is All-Bountiful, All-Knowing. 33. And let those who 
do not have the means to marry keep themselves chaste until Allah enriches 
them out of His bounty. And if any of those ‘bondspeople’ in your 
possession desires a deed of emancipation,!2°8) make it possible for them, if 
you find goodness in them. And give them some of Allah’s wealth which 
He has granted you. Do not force your ‘slave’ girls into prostitution for your 
own worldly gains while they wish to remain chaste.'2°2! And if someone 
coerces them, then after such a coercion Allah is certainly All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful ‘to them’. 
Examples and Lessons 

34. Indeed, We have sent down to you clear revelations, along with 
examples of those who had gone before you,!22! and a lesson to the God- 
fearing. 


Parable for the Believer’s Heart 


35. Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. His light!22!! is like a 
niche in which there is a lamp, the lamp is in a crystal, the crystal is like a 
shining star, lit from ‘the oil of" a blessed olive tree, ‘located’ neither to the 
east nor the west,! 2! whose oil would almost glow, even without being 
touched by fire. Light upon light! Allah guides whoever He wills to His 
light. And Allah sets forth parables for humanity. For Allah has ‘perfect’ 
knowledge of all things. 


True Believers 

36. "That light shines’ through houses ‘of worship’ which Allah has ordered 
to be raised, and where His Name is mentioned. He is glorified there 
morning and evening 37. by men!23! who are not distracted—either by 
buying or selling—from Allah’s remembrance, or performing prayer, or 
paying alms-tax. They fear a Day when hearts and eyes will tremble, 38. 
"hoping’ that Allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds, 
and increase them out of His grace. And Allah provides for whoever He 
wills without limit. 


Parable for the Disbelievers 
39. As for the disbelievers, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert, which 
the thirsty perceive as water, but when they approach it, they find it to be 
nothing. Instead, they find Allah there ‘in the Hereafter, ready’ to settle their 
account. And Allah is swift in reckoning. 


Another Parable 
40. Or ‘their deeds are’ like the darkness in a deep sea, covered by waves 
upon waves,!2/4! topped by “dark” clouds. Darkness upon darkness! If one 
stretches out their hand, they can hardly see it. And whoever Allah does not 
bless with light will have no light! 


Submission to Allah 
41. Do you not see that Allah is glorified by all those in the heavens and the 
earth, even the birds as they soar? Each ‘instinctively’ knows their manner 
of prayer and glorification. And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all they 
do. 42. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. 
And to Allah is the final return. 


The Miracle of Rain 


43. Do you not see that Allah gently drives the clouds, then joins them 
together, piling them up into masses, from which you see raindrops come 
forth? And He sends down from the sky mountains ‘of clouds’ loaded with 
hail, pouring it on whoever He wills and averting it from whoever He wills. 
The flash of the clouds’ lightning nearly takes away eyesight. 44. Allah 
alternates the day and night. Surely in this is a lesson for people of insight. 


The Miracle of Creation 
45. And Allah has created from water every living creature. Some of them 
crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. Allah 
creates whatever He wills. Surely Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


The Hypocrites and Judgment 

46. We have indeed sent down revelations clarifying "the truth’. But Allah 
‘only’ guides whoever He wills to the Straight Path. 47. And the hypocrites 
say, “We believe in Allah and the Messenger, and we obey.” Then a group 
of them turns away soon after that. These are not ‘true’ believers. 48. And 
as soon as they are called to Allah and His Messenger so he may judge 
between them, a group of them!245! turns away. 49. But if the truth is in 
their favour, they come to him, fully submitting. 50. Is there a sickness in 
their hearts? Or are they in doubt? Or do they fear that Allah and His 
Messenger will be unjust to them? In fact, it is they who are the ‘true’ 
wrongdoers. 


The Believers and Judgment 
51. The only response of the ‘true’ believers, when they are called to Allah 
and His Messenger so he may judge between them, is to say, “We hear and 
obey.” It is they who will ‘truly’ succeed. 52. For whoever obeys Allah and 
His Messenger, and fears Allah and is mindful of Him, then it is they who 
will “truly” triumph. 
Hypocrites’ Lip Service 

53. They swear by Allah their most solemn oaths that if you "O Prophet’ 
were to command them, they would certainly march forth "in Allah’s cause’. 
Say, ““You' do not ‘have to’ swear; your obedience is well known!”Z16] 
Surely Allah is All-Aware of what you do.” 54. Say, “Obey Allah and obey 
the Messenger. But if you turn away, then he is only responsible for his 
duty'2Z! and you are responsible for yours.!248! And if you obey him, you 


will be ‘rightly’ guided. The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver ‘the 
message’ clearly.” 


Allah’s Promise to the Believers 

55. Allah has promised those of you who believe and do good that He will 
certainly make them successors in the land, as He did with those before 
them; and will surely establish for them their faith which He has chosen for 
them; and will indeed change their fear into security— provided that’ they 
worship Me, associating nothing with Me. But whoever disbelieves after 
this ‘promise’, it is they who will be the rebellious. 56. Moreover, establish 
prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey the Messenger, so you may be shown mercy. 
57. Do not think "O Prophet’ that the disbelievers can escape in the land. 
The Fire will be their home. Indeed, what an evil destination! 


Permission at Three Times 

58. O believers! Let those "bondspeople’ in your possession and those of 
you who are still under age ask for your permission ‘to come in’ at three 
times: before dawn prayer, when you take off your ‘outer’ clothes at noon, 
and after the late evening prayer. "These are’ three times of privacy for you. 
Other than these times, there is no blame on you or them to move freely, 
attending to one another. This is how Allah makes the revelations clear to 
you, for Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Permission at All Times 
59. And when your children reach the age of puberty, let them seek 
permission "to come in’, as their seniors do. This is how Allah makes His 
revelations clear to you, for Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


Modesty for Elderly Women 
60. As for elderly women past the age of marriage, there is no blame on 
them if they take off their ‘outer’ garments, without revealing their 
adornments. But it is better for them if they avoid this ‘altogether’. And 
Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 
No Restrictions 

61. There is no restriction on the blind, or the disabled, or the sick.'22! Nor 
on yourselves if you eat from your homes,|22! or the homes of your fathers, 
or your mothers, or your brothers, or your sisters, or your paternal uncles, or 
your paternal aunts, or your maternal uncles, or your maternal aunts, or 


from the homes in your trust, or "the homes of" your friends. There is no 
blame on you eating together or separately. However, when you enter 
houses, greet one another with a greeting ‘of peace’ from Allah, blessed and 
good.'221] This is how Allah makes His revelations clear to you, so perhaps 
you will understand. 


Sticking with the Prophet 

62. The ‘true’ believers are only those who believe in Allah and His 
Messenger, and when they are with him on a public matter, they do not 
leave without his permission. Indeed, those who ask your permission "O 
Prophet’ are the ones who ‘truly’ believe in Allah and His Messenger. So 
when they ask your permission for a private matter, grant permission to 
whoever you wish and ask Allah’s forgiveness for them. Surely Allah is 
All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 63. Do not treat the Messenger’s summons to 
you ‘as lightly” as your summons to one another.!222! Allah certainly knows 
those of you who slip away, hiding behind others.!223) So let those who 
disobey his orders beware, for an affliction may befall them, or a painful 
torment may overtake them. 


Allah Knows Everything 
64. Surely to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He 
knows well what you stand for. And ‘on’ the Day all will be returned to 
Him, He will inform them of what they did. For Allah has ‘perfect’ 
knowledge of all things. 
akk 


25. The Standard 
(Al-Furqan) 


This Meccan surah takes its name from verses 1-6, which refute the pagan 
claims that the Quran was fabricated and plagiarized from earlier 
scriptures. Other passages .¢gndemn polytheism, denial of resurrection, and 
mocking the Prophet ( -{z-{;). Allah’s power, manifested in the marvels of 
creation and rain, is i ined in this sirah and the previous one. The 
qualities of the righteous servants of Allah are beautifully laid out in verses 
63-76. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Kingdom of Almighty Allah 
1. Blessed is the One Who sent down the Standard!224! to His servant,!225! 
so that he may be a warner to the whole world.'229! 2, "Allah is” the One to 
Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, Who has never 
had ‘any’ offspring, nor does He have a partner in ‘governing’ the kingdom. 
He has created everything, ordaining it precisely. 


The Polytheists 
3. Yet they have taken besides Him gods who cannot create anything but are 
themselves created. Nor can they protect or benefit themselves. Nor can 
they control life, death, or resurrection. 
Denying the Quran 

4. The disbelievers say, “This ‘Quran’ is nothing but a fabrication which 
he!2Z] made up with the help of others.” Their claim is totally unjustified 
and untrue! 5. And they say, “These revelations are only’ ancient fables 
which he has had written down, and they are rehearsed to him morning and 
evening.”!228] 6. Say, "O Prophet,’ “This “Quran” has been revealed by the 
One Who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. Surely He is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful.”!229! 


Denying the Prophet 


7. And they say "mockingly’, “What kind of messenger is this who eats 
food and goes about in market-places ‘for a living’? If only an angel had 
been sent down with him to be his co-warner, 8. or a treasure had been cast 
down to him, or he had had a garden from which he may eat!” And the 
wrongdoers say ‘to the believers’, “You are only following a bewitched 
man.” 9. See "O Prophet” how they call you names!!220! So they have gone 
so ‘far’ astray that they cannot find the Right’ Way. 10. Blessed is the One 
Who—if He wills—can give you far better than ‘all’ that: gardens under 
which rivers flow, and palaces as well. 


Torment for the Deniers 
11. In fact, they deny the Hour. And for the deniers of the Hour, We 
have prepared a blazing Fire. 12. Once it sees them from a distance, they 
will hear it fuming and growling. 13. And when they are tossed into a 
narrow place inside "Hell’, chained together, then and there they will cry out 
for ‘instant’ destruction. 14. "They will be told,’ “Do not cry only once for 
destruction, but cry many times over!” 


Reward of the Righteous 
15. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Is this better or the Garden of Eternity which the 
righteous have been promised, as a reward and ‘an ultimate’ destination? 
16. There they will have whatever they wish for, forever. That is a promise 
"to be sought after’, binding on your Lord.” 


The Disavowal 

17. "Watch for’ the Day He will gather them along with what they used to 
worship besides Allah, and ask "the objects of worship’,'222! “Was it you 
who misled these servants of Mine, or did they stray from the Way ‘on their 
own’?” 18. They will say, “Glory be to You! It was not right for ‘others like’ 
us to take any lords besides You,!Z3] but You allowed enjoyment for them 
and their forefathers ‘for so long’ that they forgot "Your" remembrance and 
became a doomed people.” 19. "The doomed will be told’, “Your gods have 
clearly denied your claims. So now you can neither ward off ‘the 
punishment’ nor get any help.” And whoever of you does wrong, We will 
make them taste a horrible punishment. 


Messengers Are Human 


20. We never sent any messenger before you "O Prophet’, who did not eat 
food and go about in market-places. We have made some of you a trial for 
others. Will you ‘not then’ be patient? And your Lord is All-Seeing. 


Desperate to Meet the Angels 

21. Those who do not expect to meet Us say, “If only the angels were sent 
down to us, or we could see our Lord!” They have certainly been carried 
away by their arrogance and have entirely exceeded all limits. 22. ‘But’ on 
the Day they will see the angels, there will be no good news for the wicked, 
who will cry, “Keep away! Away "from us"!”!234! 23. Then We will turn to 
whatever "good" deeds they did, reducing them to scattered dust.!225! 24, 
"But' on that Day the residents of Paradise will have the best settlement and 
the finest place to rest. 


Judgment Day 
25. "Watch for’ the Day the heavens will burst with clouds, and the angels 
will be sent down in successive ranks. 26. True authority on that Day will 
belong ‘only to the Most Compassionate.'2°5! And it will be a hard day for 
the disbelievers. 


Useless Remorse!2321. 
27. And "beware of' the Day the wrongdoer will bite his nails ‘in regret’ and 
say, “Oh! I wish I had followed the Way along with the Messenger! 28. 
Woe to me! I wish I had never taken so-and-so as a close friend. 29. It was 
he who truly made me stray from the Reminder after it had reached me.” 
And Satan has always betrayed humanity. 


Pagans’ Neglect of the Quran 

30. The Messenger has cried, “O my Lord! My people have indeed received 
this Quran with neglect.” 31. Similarly, We made enemies for every prophet 
from among the wicked, but sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and Helper. 
32. The disbelievers say, “If only the Quran had been sent down to him all 
at once!” "We have sent it’ as such ‘in stages’ so We may reassure your 
heart with it. And We have revealed it at a deliberate pace. 33. Whenever 
they bring you an argument, We come to you with the right refutation and 
the best explanation. 34. Those who will be dragged into Hell on their faces 
will be in the worst place, and are ‘now’ farthest from the "Right" Way. 


Destruction of Pharaoh’s People 


35. We certainly gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron as 
his helper. 36. We had ordered ‘them’, “Go to the people who would deny 
Our signs.” Then We annihilated the deniers entirely. 


Destruction of Noah’s People 
37. And when the people of Noah rejected the messengers,'228! We drowned 
them, making them an example to humanity. And We have prepared a 
painful punishment for the wrongdoers. 


Destruction of Other Peoples 
38. Also "We destroyed’ Âd, Thamiid, and the people of the Water-pit,! 229] 
as well as many peoples in between. 39. For each We set forth ‘various’ 
lessons, and We ultimately destroyed each. 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 
40. They have certainly passed by the city "of Sodom’, which had been 
showered with a dreadful rain ‘of stones’. Have they not seen its ruins? But 
they do not expect to be resurrected. 41. When they see you "O Prophet’, 
they only make fun of you, "saying, ' “Is this the one that Allah has sent as a 
messenger? 42. He would have almost tricked us away from our gods, had 
we not been so devoted to them.” ‘But’ soon they will know, when they face 
the punishment, who is far astray from the ‘Right’ Way. 43. Have you seen 
"O Prophet’ the one who has taken their own desires as their god? Will you 
then be a keeper over them? 44. Or do you think that most of them listen or 
understand?!“42! They are only like cattle—no, more than that, they are 
astray from the "Right" Way!!241 
Allah’s Power: 1) The Sun and Shade 
45. Have you not seen how your Lord extends the shade—He could have 
simply made it ‘remain’ still if He so willed—then We make the sun its 
guide, 46. causing the shade to retreat gradually?!242! 
2) The Day and Night 
47. He is the One Who has made the night for you as a cover, and "made" 
sleep for resting, and the day for rising. 
3) The Rain 
48. And He is the One Who sends the winds ushering in His mercy, and We 
send down pure rain from the sky, 49. giving life to a lifeless land, and 


providing water for countless animals and humans of Our Own creation. 50. 
We certainly disperse it among them so they may be mindful, but most 
people persist in ungratefulness. 


One Universal Messenger 
51. Had We willed, We could have easily sent a warner to every society. 52. 
So do not yield to the disbelievers, but strive diligently against them with 
this ‘Quran’. 
4) Fresh and Salt Water 

53. And He is the One Who merges the two bodies of water: one fresh and 
palatable and the other salty and bitter, placing between them a barrier they 
cannot cross.!243! 


5) Creation of Humans 
54. And He is the One Who creates human beings from a ‘humble’ liquid, 
[744] then establishes for them bonds of kinship and marriage. For your Lord 
is Most Capable. 


Powerless Gods 
55. Yet they worship besides Allah what can neither benefit nor harm them. 
And the disbeliever always collaborates against their Lord. 


Advice to the Prophet: Trust in Allah 
56. And We have sent you "O Prophet’ only as a deliverer of good news and 
a warner. 57. Say, “I do not ask you for any reward for this "message’, but 
whoever wishes, let them pursue the Way to their Lord.” 58. Put your trust 
in the Ever-Living, Who never dies, and glorify His praises. Sufficient is He 
as All-Aware of the sins of His servants. 59. "He is’ the One Who created 
the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six Days,'745! then 
established Himself on the Throne. "He is’ the Most Compassionate! Ask 
"none other than’ the All-Knowledgeable about Himself. 

Denying Allah 

60. When it is said to them, “Prostrate to the Most Compassionate,” they 
ask "in disgust’, “What is ‘the Most Compassionate’? Will we prostrate to 
whatever you order us to?” And it only drives them farther away. 


Allah Almighty 


61. Blessed is the One Who has placed constellations in the sky, as well as a 
"radiant" lamp!Z6! and a luminous moon. 62. And He is the One Who 
causes the day and the night to alternate, "as a sign’ for whoever desires to 
be mindful or to be grateful. 


Qualities of the Righteous: 1) Humility 
63. The ‘true’ servants of the Most Compassionate are those who walk on 
the earth humbly, and when the foolish address them ‘improperly’, they 
only respond with peace. 


2) Sincere Devotion 
64. "They are’ those who spend ‘a good portion of’ the night, prostrating 
themselves and standing before their Lord. 


3) ‘Hope and’ Fear 
65. "They are’ those who pray, “Our Lord! Keep the punishment of Hell 
away from us, for its punishment is indeed unrelenting. 66. It is certainly an 
evil place to settle and reside.” 


4) Moderate Spending 
67. "They are’ those who spend neither wastefully nor stingily, but 
moderately in between. 

5) Avoiding Major Sins 
68. "They are’ those who do not invoke any other god besides Allah, nor 
take a “human” life—made sacred by Allah—except with "legal" right,!247! 
nor commit fornication. And whoever does ‘any of' this will face the 
penalty. 69. Their punishment will be multiplied on the Day of Judgment, 
and they will remain in it forever, in disgrace. 70. As for those who repent, 
believe, and do good deeds, they are the ones whose evil deeds Allah will 
change into good deeds. For Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 71. And 
whoever repents and does good has truly turned to Allah properly. 

6) Avoiding Falsehood 
72. “They are’ those who do not bear false witness, and when they come 
across falsehood, they pass ‘it’ by with dignity. 

7) Full Submission 

73. "They are’ those who, when reminded of the revelation of their Lord, do 
not turn a blind eye or a deaf ear to it. 


8) Righteous Company 
74. "They are’ those who pray, “Our Lord! Bless us with "pious" spouses 
and offspring who will be the joy of our hearts, and make us models for the 
righteous.” 


Reward of the Righteous 
75. It is they who will be rewarded with ‘elevated’ mansions "in Paradise’ 
for their perseverance, and will be received with salutations and ‘greetings 
of" peace, 76. staying there forever. What an excellent place to settle and 
reside! 


Call to Humanity 
77. Say, "O Prophet,’ “You ‘all’ would not "even" matter to my Lord were it 
not for your faith ‘in Him’. But now you ‘disbelievers’ have denied ‘the 
truth’, so the torment is bound to come.” 
kkk 


26. The Poets 
(Ash-Shu’ara') 


This Meccan sirah takes its name from the reference to poets in verses 224- 
226. Since the previous sûrah ends with a warning to the deniers of the 
truth, this sirah recounts several cautionary tales of destroyed deniers such 
as Pharaoh and the peoples of Noah, Shu’aib, Lot, and Sâlih. The divine 
origin of the Quran is emphasized at both ends of the stirah. The qualities of 
the believers mentioned in the last verse (227) are elaborated upon at the 
beginning of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to the Disbelievers 

1. Jd-Sin-Mim. 2. These are the verses of the clear Book. 3. Perhaps you "O 
Prophet’ will grieve yourself to death over their disbelief. 4. If We willed, 
We could send down upon them a ‘compelling’ sign from the heavens, 
leaving their necks bent in ‘utter’ submission to it. 5. Whatever new 
reminder comes to them from the Most Compassionate, they always turn 
away from it. 6. They have certainly denied ‘the truth’, so they will soon 
face the consequences of their ridicule. 7. Have they failed to look at the 
earth, "to see’ how many types of fine plants We have caused to grow in it? 
8. Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 9. And your 
Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


Prophet Moses 
10. ‘Remember’ when your Lord called out to Moses, “Go to the 
wrongdoing people— 11. the people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear 
"Allah"?” 12. He replied, “My Lord! I fear that they will reject me. 13. And 
"so` my heart will be broken and my tongue will be tied. So send Aaron 
along ‘as a messenger”. 14. Also, they have a charge against me,!Z48! so I 
fear they may kill me.” 15. Allah responded, “Certainly not! So go, both of 
you, with Our signs. We will be with you, listening. 16. Go to Pharaoh and 
say, ‘We are messengers from the Lord of all worlds, 17. "commanded to 
say: ‘Let the Children of Israel go with us.”’” 


Moses vs. Pharaoh 

18. Pharaoh protested, “Did we not raise you among us as a child, and you 
stayed several years of your life in our care? 19. Then you did what you did, 
[749] being ‘utterly’ ungrateful!” 20. Moses replied, “I did it then, lacking 
guidance. 21. So I fled from you when I feared you. Then my Lord granted 
me wisdom and made me one of the messengers. 22. How can that be a 
‘favour,’ of which you remind me, when ‘it was only because’ you ‘have’ 
enslaved the Children of Israel?” 23. Pharaoh asked, “And what is ‘the Lord 
of all worlds’?” 24. Moses replied, “He is’ the Lord of the heavens and the 
earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith.” 25, Pharaoh 
said to those around him, “Did you hear ‘what he said?” 26. Moses added, 
“He is’ your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.” 27. Pharaoh said 
‘mockingly’, “Your messenger, who has been sent to you, must be insane.” 
28. Moses responded: “He is’ the Lord of the east and west, and everything 
in between, if only you had any sense.” 


The Challenge 

29. Pharaoh threatened, “If you take any other god besides me, I will 
certainly have you imprisoned.” 30. Moses responded, “Even if I bring you 
a clear proof?” 31. Pharaoh demanded, “Bring it then, if what you say is 
true.” 32. So he threw down his staff and—behold!—it became a real snake. 
33. Then he drew his hand ‘out of his collar’ and it was ‘shining’ white for 
all to see. 34. Pharaoh said to the chiefs around him, “He is indeed a skilled 
magician, 35. who seeks to drive you from your land by his magic. So what 
do you propose?” 36. They replied, “Let him and his brother wait and 
dispatch mobilizers to all cities 37. to bring you every skilled magician.” 
38. So the magicians were assembled at the set time on the appointed day. 
39. And the people were asked, “Will you join the gathering, 40. so that we 
may follow the magicians if they prevail?” 


Moses and the Magicians Face off 
41. When the magicians came, they asked Pharaoh, “Shall we have a 
‘suitable’ reward if we prevail?” 42. He replied, “Yes, and you will then 
certainly be among those closest to me.” 43. Moses said to them, “Cast 
whatever you wish to cast.” 44. So they cast down their ropes and staffs, 
saying, “By Pharaoh’s might, it is we who will surely prevail.” 45. Then 


Moses threw down his staff, and—behold!—it devoured the objects of their 
illusion! 


Magicians Become Believers 

46. So the magicians fell down, prostrating. 47. They declared, “We ‘now’ 
believe in the Lord of all worlds— 48. the Lord of Moses and Aaron.” 49. 
Pharaoh threatened, “How dare you believe in him before I give you 
permission? He must be your master who taught you magic, but soon you 
will see. I will certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, then 
crucify you all.” 50. They responded, “That would be’ no harm! Surely to 
our Lord we will ‘all’ return. 51. We really hope that our Lord will forgive 
our sins, as we are the first to believe.” 


Pharaoh Chases the Israelites 
52. And We inspired Moses, ‘saying,’ “Leave with My servants at night, for 
you will surely be pursued.” 53. Then Pharaoh sent mobilizers to all cities, 
54. ‘and said,’ “These ‘outcasts’ are just a handful of people, 55. who have 
really enraged us, 56. but we are all on the alert.” 57. So We lured the 
tyrants] out of ‘their’ gardens, springs, 58. treasures, and splendid 
residences. 59. So it was. And We awarded it “all” to the Children of Israel. 


The End of Pharaoh 

60. And so they pursued them at sunrise. 61. When the two groups came 
face to face, the companions of Moses cried out, “We are overtaken for 
sure.” 62. Moses reassured ‘them’, “Absolutely not! My Lord is certainly 
with me—He will guide me.” 63. So We inspired Moses: “Strike the sea 
with your staff,” and the sea was split, each part was like a huge mountain. 
64. We drew the pursuers to that place, 65. and delivered Moses and those 
with him all together. 66. Then We drowned the others. 67. Surely in this is 
a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 68. And your Lord is certainly 
the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


Prophet Abraham 
69. Relate to them "O Prophet’ the story of Abraham, 70. when he 
questioned his father and his people, “What is that you worship "besides 
Allah"?” 71. They replied, “We worship idols, to which we are fully 
devoted.” 72. Abraham asked, “Can they hear you when you call upon 
them? 73. Or can they benefit or harm you?” 74. They replied, “No! But we 


found our forefathers doing the same.” 75. Abraham responded, “Have you 
‘really’ considered what you have been worshipping— 76. you and your 
ancestors? 77. They are ‘all’ enemies to me, except the Lord of all worlds. 
78. ‘He is’ the One Who created me, and He ‘alone’ guides me. 79. "He is’ 
the One Who provides me with food and drink. 80. And He ‘alone’ heals 
me when I am sick. 81. And He ‘is the One Who’ will cause me to die, and 
then bring me back to life. 82. And He is ‘the One’ Who, I hope, will 
forgive my flaws! on Judgment Day.” 


Abraham’s Prayer 
83. “My Lord! Grant me wisdom, and join me with the righteous. 84. Bless 
me with honourable mention among later generations.'2°2! 85. Make me one 
of those awarded the Garden of Bliss. 86. Forgive my father, for he is 
certainly one of the misguided. 87. And do not disgrace me on the Day all 
will be resurrected— 88. the Day when neither wealth nor children will be 
of any benefit. 89. Only those who come before Allah with a pure heart 


"will be saved’,”!223! 


Judgment Day 
90. "On that Day’ Paradise will be brought near to the God-fearing, 91. and 
the Hellfire will be displayed to the deviant. 92. And it will be said to them, 
“Where are those you used to worship 93. besides Allah? Can they help you 
or even help themselves?” 94. Then the idols will be hurled headlong into 
Hell, along with the deviant 95. and the soldiers of Iblis,!24! all together. 
96. There the deviant will cry while disputing with their idols, 97. “By 
Allah! We were clearly mistaken, 98. when we made you equal to the Lord 
of all worlds. 99. And none led us astray other than the wicked. 100. Now 
we have none to intercede for us, 101. nor a close friend. 102. If only we 
could have a second chance, then we would be believers.” 103. Surely in 
this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 104. And your Lord is 
certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 

Prophet Noah 
105. The people of Noah rejected the messengers'25! 106. when their 
brother Noah said to them, “Will you not fear "Allah"? 107. I am truly a 
trustworthy messenger to you. 108. So fear Allah, and obey me. 109. I do 
not ask you for any reward for this ‘message’. My reward is only from the 


Lord of all worlds. 110. So fear Allah, and obey me.” 111. They argued, 
“How can we believe in you, when you are followed ‘only’ by the lowest of 
the low?”[Z6] 112. He responded, “And what knowledge do I have of what 
they do? 113. Their judgment is with my Lord, if you had any sense! 114. I 
am not going to expel the believers. 115. I am only sent with a clear 
warning.” 


Noah’s People Destroyed 

116. They threatened, “If you do not desist, O Noah, you will surely be 
stoned ‘to death’.” 117. Noah prayed, “My Lord! My people have truly 
rejected me. 118. So judge between me and them decisively, and save me 
and the believers with me.” 119. So We saved him and those with him in the 
fully loaded Ark. 120. Then afterwards We drowned the rest. 121. Surely in 
this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 122. And your Lord is 
certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


Prophet Hiid 

123. The people of ’Ad rejected the messengers 124. when their brother 
Had said to them, “Will you not fear "Allah"? 125. I am truly a trustworthy 
messenger to you. 126. So fear Allah, and obey me. 127. I do not ask you 
for any reward for this ‘message’. My reward is only from the Lord of all 
worlds. 128. 'Why' do you build a landmark on every high place in vanity, 
129. and construct castles, as if you are going to live forever, 130. and act 
so viciously when you attack ‘others’? 131. So fear Allah, and obey me. 
132. Fear the One Who has provided you with ‘the good’ things you know: 
133. He provided you with cattle, and children, 134. and gardens, and 
springs. 135. I truly fear for you the torment of a tremendous day.” 


Hûd’s People Destroyed 
136. They responded, “It is all the same to us whether you warn ‘us’ or not. 
137. This is simply the tradition of our predecessors. 138. And we will 
never be punished.” 139. So they rejected him, and “so` We destroyed them. 
Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 140. And your 
Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


Prophet Sâlih 
141. The people of Thamfid rejected the messengers 142. when their brother 
Salih said to them, “Will you not fear ‘Allah’? 143. I am truly a trustworthy 


messenger to you. 144. So fear Allah, and obey me. 145. I do not ask you 
for any reward for this ‘message’. My reward is only from the Lord of all 
worlds. 146. Do you think you will be ‘forever’ left secure in what you have 
here: 147. amid gardens and springs, 148. and ‘various’ crops, and palm 
trees ‘loaded’ with tender fruit; 149. to carve homes in the mountains with 
great skill? 150. So fear Allah, and obey me. 151. And do not follow the 
command of the transgressors, 152. who spread corruption throughout the 
land, never setting things right.” 


Salih’s People Destroyed 

153. They replied, “You are simply bewitched! 154. You are only a human 
being like us, so bring forth a sign if what you say is true.” 155. Salih said, 
“Here is a camel. She will have her turn to drink as you have yours, each on 
an appointed day. 156. And do not ever touch her with harm, or you will be 
overtaken by the torment of a tremendous day.” 157. But they killed her, 
becoming regretful. 158. So the punishment overtook them. Surely in this is 
a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 159. And your Lord is certainly 
the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


Prophet Lot 

160. The people of Lot rejected the messengers 161. when their brother Lot 
said to them, “Will you not fear "Allah’? 162. I am truly a trustworthy 
messenger to you. 163. So fear Allah, and obey me. 164. I do not ask you 
for any reward for this ‘message’. My reward is only from the Lord of all 
worlds. 165. Why do you “men” lust after fellow men,!222! 166. leaving the 
wives that your Lord has created for you? In fact, you are a transgressing 
people.” 


Lot’s People Destroyed 
167. They threatened, “If you do not desist, O Lot, you will surely be 
expelled.” 168. Lot responded, “I am truly one of those who despise your 
"shameful" practice. 169. My Lord! Save me and my family from ‘the 
consequences of’ what they do.” 170. So We saved him and all of his 
family, 171. except an old woman,|228] who was one of the doomed. 172. 
Then We utterly destroyed the rest, 173. pouring upon them a rain ‘of 
brimstone’. How evil was the rain of those who had been warned! 174. 


Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 175. And your 
Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


Prophet Shu’aib 

176. The residents of the Forest rejected the messengers 177. when Shu’aib 
said to them,!259! “Will you not fear “Allah”? 178. I am truly a trustworthy 
messenger to you. 179. So fear Allah, and obey me. 180. I do not ask you 
for any reward for this ‘message’. My reward is only from the Lord of all 
worlds. 181. Give full measure, and cause no loss ‘to others’. 182. Weigh 
with an even balance, 183. and do not defraud people of their property. Nor 
go about spreading corruption in the land. 184. And fear the One Who 
created you and ‘all’ earlier peoples.” 


Shu’aib’s People Destroyed 

185. They replied, “You are simply bewitched! 186. Also, you are only a 
human being like us, and we think you are indeed a liar. 187. So cause 
‘deadly’ pieces of the sky to fall upon us, if what you say is true.” 188. 
Shu’aib responded, “My Lord knows best whatever you do.” 189. So they 
rejected him, and ‘so’ were overtaken by the torment of the day of the 
"deadly" cloud.!282! That was really a torment of a tremendous day. 190. 
Surely in this is a sign. Yet most of them would not believe. 191. And your 
Lord is certainly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 


The Quran 

192. This is certainly a revelation from the Lord of all worlds, 193. which 
the trustworthy spirit “Gabriel” brought down 194. into your heart "O 
Prophet’—so that you may be one of the warners— 195. in a clear Arabic 
tongue. 196. And it has indeed been ‘foretold’ in the Scriptures of those 
before. 197. Was it not sufficient proof for the deniers that it has been 
recognized by the knowledgeable among the Children of Israel?!2&!! 198. 
Had We revealed it to a non-Arab, 199. who would then recite it to the 
deniers ‘in fluent Arabic’, still they would not have believed in it! 200. This 
is how We allow denial ‘to steep’ into the hearts of the wicked. 201. They 
will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment, 202. which will 
take them by surprise when they least expect ‘it’. 203. Then they will cry, 
“Can we be allowed more time?” 


Warning to the Meccan Pagans 


204. Do they ‘really’ seek to hasten Our torment? 205. Imagine "O Prophet’ 
if We allowed them enjoyment for years, 206. then there came to them what 
they had been threatened with: 207. would that enjoyment be of any benefit 
to them ‘at all’? 208. We have never destroyed a society without warners 
209. to remind ‘them’, for We would never wrong ‘anyone’. 


The Quran Is Allah’s Word 
210. It was not the devils who brought this ‘Quran* down: 211. it is not for 
them ‘to do so’, nor can they, 212. for they are strictly barred from ‘even’ 
overhearing “it”.!262! 


Advice to the Prophet 
213. So do not ever call upon any other god besides Allah, or you will be 
one of the punished. 214. And warn ‘all, starting with’ your closest 
relatives, 215. and be gracious to the believers who follow you. 216. But if 
they disobey you, say, “I am certainly free of what you do.” 217. Put your 
trust in the Almighty, Most Merciful, 218. Who sees you when you rise "for 
prayer at night’, 219. as well as your movements ‘in prayer’ along with 
‘fellow’ worshippers. 220. He ‘alone’ is indeed the All-Hearing, All- 
Knowing. 
The Devils 

221. Shall I inform you of whom the devils ‘actually’ descend upon? 222. 
They descend upon every sinful liar, 223. who gives an ‘attentive’ ear "to 
half-truths’, mostly passing on sheer lies.!2&3! 


The Poets 
224. As for poets, they are followed "merely’ by deviants. 225. Do you not 
see how they rant in every field,!2&4! 226. only saying what they never do? 
227. Except those who believe, do good, remember Allah often, and 
"poetically’ avenge ‘the believers’ after being wrongfully slandered. The 
wrongdoers will come to know what ‘evil’ end they will meet. 
oie ie oe 


27. The Ants 
(An-Naml) 
ade 
This Meccan sirah narrates the encounters of Solomon ( .{z,/;) with ants 
(hence the sûrah’s name), a hoopoe, and the Queen of Sh¢bd@which do not 
appear in any other sûrah. Allah’s power to create and provide is 
contrasted with the powerlessness of the idols. Some deterring examples are 
given to the pagapg,gilong with a warning of the horrors of the apocalypse. 
The Prophet ( -{z-[;) is reassured of the truth of the Quran and told that 
his duty is oni’ eliver the message. Judgment rests with Allah alone. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Qualities of the Believers 
1. /da-Sin. These are the verses of the Quran; the clear Book. 2. ‘It is’ a 
guide and good news for the believers: 3. ‘those’ who establish prayer, pay 
alms-tax, and have sure faith in the Hereafter. 


Qualities of the Disbelievers 
4. As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have certainly made 
their ‘evil’ deeds appealing to them, so they wander blindly. 5. It is they 
who will suffer a dreadful torment, and in the Hereafter they will "truly" be 
the greatest losers. 6. And indeed, you "O Prophet’ are receiving the Quran 
from the One "Who is’ All-Wise, All-Knowing. 


Moses and the Nine Signs 
7. Remember’ when Moses said to his family, “I have spotted a fire. I will 
either bring you some directions!2®! from there, or a burning torch so you 
may warm yourselves.” 8. But when he came to it, he was called "by Allah’, 
“Blessed is the one at the fire, and whoever is around it!!Z6®] Glory be to 
Allah, the Lord of all worlds. 9. O Moses! It is truly I. I am Allah—the 
Almighty, All-Wise. 10. Now, throw down your staff!” But when he saw it 
slithering like a snake, he ran away without looking back. ‘Allah reassured 
him,’ “O Moses! Do not be afraid! Messengers should have no fear in My 
presence. 11. "Fear is’ only for those who do wrong. But if they later mend 
‘their’ evil "ways’ with good, then I am certainly All-Forgiving, Most 


Merciful. 12. Now put your hand through ‘the opening of’ your collar, it 
will come out ‘shining’ white, unblemished.!Z£2! "These are two’ of nine 
signs for Pharaoh and his people.!268! They have truly been a rebellious 
people.” 13. But when Our enlightening signs came to them, they said, 
“This is pure magic.” 14. And, although their hearts were convinced the 
signs were true, they still denied them wrongfully and arrogantly. See then 
what was the end of the corruptors! 


David and Solomon 
15. Indeed, We granted knowledge to David and Solomon. And they said 
"in acknowledgment’, “All praise is for Allah Who has privileged us over 
many of His faithful servants.”!262! 16. And David was succeeded by 
Solomon, who said, “O people! We have been taught the language of birds, 
and been given everything ‘we need’. This is indeed a great privilege.” 


Solomon and the Ant 

17. Solomon’s forces of jinn, humans, and birds were rallied for him, 
perfectly organized. 18. And when they came across a valley of ants, an ant 
warned, “O ants! Go quickly into your homes so Solomon and his armies 
do not crush you, unknowingly.” 19. So Solomon smiled in amusement at 
her words, and prayed, “My Lord! Inspire me to ‘always’ be thankful for 
Your favours which You have blessed me and my parents with, and to do 
good deeds that please you. Admit me, by Your mercy, into "the company 
of’ Your righteous servants.” 


Solomon and the Hoopoe 
20. “One day’ he inspected the birds, and wondered, “Why is it that I cannot 
see the hoopoe? Or could he be absent? 21. I will surely subject him to a 
severe punishment, or ‘even’ slaughter him, unless he brings me a 
compelling excuse.” 22. It was not long before the bird came and said, “I 
have found out something you do not know. I have just come to you from 
Sheba with sure news. 23. Indeed, I found a woman ruling over them, {222 
who has been given everything ‘she needs’, and who has a magnificent 
throne. 24. I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of 
Allah. For Satan has made their deeds appealing to them—hindering them 
from the "Right’ Way and leaving them unguided— 25. so they do not 
prostrate to Allah, Who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the 


earth, and knows what you ‘all’ conceal and what you reveal. 26. ‘He is’ 
Allah! There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him, the Lord of the 
Mighty Throne.” 


Solomon’s Letter 

27. Solomon said, “We will see whether you are telling the truth or lying. 
28. Go with this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then stand aside and 
see how they will respond.” 29. The Queen ‘later’ announced, “O chiefs! 
Indeed, a noble letter has been delivered to me. 30. It is from Solomon, and 
it reads: ‘In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful. 
31. Do not be arrogant with me, but come to me, fully submitting ‘to 
Allah’.’” 


The Queen’s Response 
32. She said, “O chiefs! Advise me in this matter of mine, for I would never 
make any decision without you.” 33. They responded, “We are a people of 
strength and great ‘military’ might, but the decision is yours, so decide what 
you will command.” 34. She reasoned, “Indeed, when kings invade a land, 
they ruin it and debase its nobles. They really do so! 35. But I will certainly 
send him a gift, and see what "response" my envoys will return with.” [Z4 


Solomon’s Response 
36. When the chief-envoy came to him, Solomon said, “Do you offer me 
wealth? What Allah has granted me is far greater than what He has granted 
you. No! It is you who rejoice in ‘receiving’ gifts. 37. Go back to them, for 
we will certainly mobilize against them forces which they can never resist, 
and we will drive them out from there in disgrace, fully humbled.”!222! 


The Queen’s Throne 
38. Solomon asked, “O chiefs! Which of you can bring me her throne 
before they come to me in “full” submission?”!22! 39. One mighty jinn 
responded, “I can bring it to you before you rise from this council of yours. 
And I am quite strong and trustworthy for this ‘task’.” 40. But the one who 
had knowledge of the Scripture said,'24! “I can bring it to you in the blink 
of an eye.” So when Solomon saw it placed before him, he exclaimed, 
“This is by the grace of my Lord to test me whether I am grateful or 
ungrateful. And whoever is grateful, it is only for their own good. But 
whoever is ungrateful, surely my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Most Generous.” 


41. ‘Then’ Solomon said, “Disguise her throne for her so we may see 
whether she will recognize ‘it’ or she will not be able to.” 42. So when she 
arrived, it was said ‘to her’, “Is your throne like this?” She replied, “It looks 
to be the same. We have ‘already’ received knowledge ‘of Solomon’s 
prophethood"25! before this ‘miracle’,'2“6! and have submitted "to Allah’.” 
43. But she had been hindered by what she used to worship instead of 
Allah, for she was indeed from a disbelieving people. 


Solomon’s Palace 
44. Then she was told, “Enter the palace.” But when she saw the hall, she 
thought it was a body of water, so she bared her legs. Solomon said. “It is 
just a palace paved with crystal.” "At last’ she declared, “My Lord! I have 
certainly wronged my soul. Now I ‘fully’ submit myself along with 
Solomon to Allah, the Lord of all worlds.” 


Prophet Sâlih and His People 
45. And We certainly sent to the people of Thamiid their brother Salih, 
proclaiming, “Worship Allah,” but they suddenly split into two opposing 
groups.'2Z7 46. He urged "the disbelieving group’, “O my people! Why do 
you ‘seek to” hasten the torment!28! rather than grace?!7! If only you 
sought Allah’s forgiveness so you may be shown mercy!” 47. They replied, 
“You and your followers are a bad omen for us.”!78°! He responded, “Your 
omens are destined by Allah. In fact, you are ‘only’ a people being tested.” 
An Attempt on Sdlih’s Life 

48. And there were in the city nine ‘elite’ men who spread corruption in the 
land, never doing what is right. 49. They vowed, “Let us swear by Allah 
that we will take him and his family down by night. Then we will certainly 
say to his ‘closest’ heirs, ‘We did not witness the murder of his family. We 
are definitely telling the truth.’” 50. And ‘so’ they made a plan, but We too 
made a plan, while they were unaware. 51. See then what the consequences 
of their plan were: We ‘utterly’ destroyed them and their people all together. 
52. So their homes are there, "but completely’ ruined because of their 
wrongdoing. Surely in this is a lesson for people of knowledge. 53. And We 
delivered those who were faithful and were mindful ‘of Allah’. 


Prophet Lot and His People 


54. And ‘remember’ Lot, when he rebuked "the men of" his people, “Do you 
commit that shameful deed while you can see ‘one another’? 55. Do you 
really lust after men instead of women? In fact, you are ‘only’ a people 
acting ignorantly.” 56. But his people’s only response was to say, “Expel 
Lot’s followers from your land! They are a people who wish to remain 
chaste!” 57. So We delivered him and his family, except his wife. We had 
destined her to be one of the doomed. 58. And We poured upon them a rain 
"of brimstone’. How evil was the rain of those who had been warned! 


Questions to the Pagans:1) Who Is the Creator? 

59. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Praise be to Allah, and peace be upon the servants He 
has chosen.” ‘Ask the disbelievers,’ “Which is better: Allah or whatever 
"gods` they associate "with Him"?” 60. Or ‘ask them,’ “Who created the 
heavens and the earth, and sends down rain for you from the sky, by which 
We cause delightful gardens to grow? You could never cause their trees to 
grow. Was it another god besides Allah?” Absolutely not! But they are a 
people who set up equals ‘to Allah"! 61. Or ‘ask them,’ “Who made the 
earth a place of settlement, caused rivers to flow through it, placed firm 
mountains upon it, and set a barrier between ‘fresh and salt’ bodies of 
water?!281] Was it another god besides Allah?” Absolutely not! But most of 
them do not know. 


2) Who Is the Most Gracious ? 

62. Or ‘ask them,’ “Who responds to the distressed when they cry to Him, 
relieving ‘their’ affliction, and "Who’* makes you successors in the earth? Is 
it another god besides Allah? Yet you are hardly mindful!” 63. Or ‘ask 
them,” “Who guides you in the darkness of the land and sea,'282! and sends 
the winds ushering in His mercy?!282! Is it another god besides Allah? 
Exalted is Allah above what they associate "with Him"! 64. Or ‘ask them, ' 
“Who originates the creation then resurrects it, and gives you provisions 
from the heavens and the earth? Is it another god besides Allah?” Say, "O 
Prophet,’ “Show ‘me’ your proof, if what you say is true.” 


Only Allah Knows the Unseen! 284! 
65. Say, "O Prophet,’ “None in the heavens and the earth has knowledge of 
the unseen except Allah. Nor do they know when they will be resurrected.” 


66. No! Their knowledge of the Hereafter amounts to ignorance. In fact, 
they are in doubt about it. In truth, they are ‘totally’ blind to it. 


Denying Resurrection 
67. The disbelievers ask, “When we and our fathers are reduced to dust, 
will we really be brought forth ‘alive’? 68. We have already been promised 
this, as well as our forefathers earlier. This is nothing but ancient fables!” 
69. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Travel throughout the land and see the fate of the 
wicked.” 70. Do not grieve for them, nor be distressed by their schemes. 


Ridiculing Punishment 

71. They ask ‘the believers’, “When will this threat come to pass, if what 
you say is true?” 72. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Perhaps some of what you seek to 
hasten is close at hand.” 73. Surely your Lord is ever Bountiful to humanity, 
[785] but most of them are ungrateful. 74. And surely your Lord knows what 
their hearts conceal and what they reveal.'285! 75. For there is nothing 
hidden in the heavens or the earth without being ‘written’ in a perfect 
Record.!2821 


Advice to the Prophet 

76. Indeed, this Quran clarifies for the Children of Israel most of what they 
differ over. 77. And it is truly a guide and mercy for the believers. 78. Your 
Lord will certainly judge between them by His justice, for He is the 
Almighty, All-Knowing. 79. So put your trust in Allah, for you are surely 
upon the ‘Path of" clear truth. 80. You certainly cannot make the dead hear 
‘the truth’. Nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their 
backs and walk away. 81. Nor can you lead the blind out of their 
misguidance. You can make none hear ‘the truth" except those who believe 
in Our revelations, ‘fully’ submitting ‘to Allah’. 


The Apocalypse 
82. And when the decree ‘of the Hour’ comes to pass against them, We will 
bring forth for them a beast from the earth,!288! telling them that the people 
had no sure faith in Our revelations. 83. "Watch for’ the Day We will gather 
from every faith-community a group of those who denied Our revelations, 
and they will be driven in ranks. 84. When they ‘finally’ come before their 
Lord, He will ask ‘them’, “Did you deny My revelations without ‘even’ 
comprehending them? Or what ‘exactly’ did you do?” 85. And the decree 


‘of torment’ will be justified against them for their wrongdoing, leaving 
them speechless. 


Allah’s Power 1) The Day and Night 
86. Do they not see that We made the night for them to rest in and the day 
bright?!282! Surely in this are signs for those who believe. 


The Apocalypse 
87. And "beware of" the Day the Trumpet will be blown, and all those in the 
heavens and all those on the earth will be horrified ‘to the point of death’, 
[790] except those Allah wills "to spare’. And all will come before Him, fully 
humbled. 


Allah’s Power 2) Earth’s Rotation 
88. Now you see the mountains, thinking they are firmly fixed, but they are 
travelling ‘just’ like clouds. "That is’ the design of Allah, Who has perfected 
everything. Surely He is All-Aware of what you do. 


Judgment Day 
89. Whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded with what is better, 
and they will be secure from the horror on that Day. 90. And whoever 
comes with an evil deed will be hurled face-first into the Fire. Are you 
rewarded except for what you used to do? 


Advice to the Prophet 
91. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I have only been commanded to worship the Lord of 
this city "of Mecca’, Who has made it sacred, and to Him belongs 
everything. And I am commanded to be one of those who ‘fully’ submit "to 
Him’, 92. and to recite the Quran.” Then whoever chooses to be guided, it is 
only for their own good. But whoever chooses to stray, say, "O Prophet,’ “I 
am only a warner.” 93. And say, “All praise is for Allah! He will show you 
His signs, and you will recognize them. And your Lord is never unaware of 
what you do.” 
kkk 


28. The Whole Story 
(AF Qasas) 

vas Mospre te 
In 26:18-19, Pharaoh reminds Mosg ; z.[5) of his up-bringing in the 
care of Pharaoh and how Moses ( « brits ed an Egyptian (accidentally). 
Unlike the previous sûrah, this We surah focuses on these two aspects 
of Moses’ life in Egypt, along with his escape to Midian where he met his 
future wife. Another aspect is the story of Korah, one of the people of 
Moses, who behaved arrogantly, leading to his own destruction. Just like 
the previous surah, it reaffirms pligh’s power and the authenticity of the 
Quran. Again, the Prophet (-(z-[5) is reminded that his duty is not to 
convert, but to convey. arer dha rcizing the palgtheists (verses 45-75), the 
sûrah concludes by bidding the Prophet ( .{z-/;) to be steadfast. The next 
sûrah starts off by talking about steadfast 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Pharaoh’s Tyranny 

1. 7â-Sîn-Mìm. 2. These are the verses of the clear Book. 3. We narrate to 
you "O Prophet’ part of the story of Moses and Pharaoh in truth for people 
who believe. 4. Indeed, Pharaoh ‘arrogantly’ elevated himself in the land 
and divided its people into ‘subservient’ groups, one of which he 
persecuted, slaughtering their sons and keeping their women. He was truly 
one of the corruptors. 5. But it was Our Will to favour those who were 
oppressed in the land, making them models ‘of faith’ as well as successors; 
6. and to establish them in the land; and through them show Pharaoh, 
Haman,!Z2! and their soldiers "the fulfilment of’ what they feared,!222! 


Baby Moses in the Nile 
7. We inspired the mother of Moses: “Nurse him, but when you fear for 
him, put him then into the river, and do not fear or grieve. We will certainly 
return him to you, and make him one of the messengers.” 8. And ‘it so 
happened that’ Pharaoh’s people picked him up, only to become their 
enemy and source of grief. Surely Pharaoh, Haman, and their soldiers were 
sinful. 


Moses in the Palace 

9. Pharaoh’s wife said "to him’, “This baby is’ a source of joy for me and 
you. Do not kill him. Perhaps he may be useful to us or we may adopt him 
as a son.” They were unaware ‘of what was to come’. 10. And the heart of 
Moses’ mother ached so much that she almost gave away his identity, had 
We not reassured her heart in order for her to have faith ‘in Allah’s 
promise’. 11. And she said to his sister, “Keep track of him!” So she 
watched him from a distance, while they were unaware. 12. And We had 
caused him to refuse all wet-nurses at first, so his sister suggested, “Shall I 
direct you to a family who will bring him up for you and take good care of 
him?” 13. This is how We returned him to his mother so that her heart 
would be put at ease, and not grieve, and that she would know that Allah’s 
promise is ‘always’ true. But most people do not know. 14. And when he 
reached full strength and maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. 
This is how We reward the good-doers. 


Unintentional Killing 

15. "One day” he entered the city unnoticed by its people.'223! There he 
found two men fighting: one of his own people, and the other of his 
enemies. The man from his people called to him for help against his foe. So 
Moses punched him, causing his death. Moses cried, “This is from Satan’s 
handiwork. He is certainly a sworn, misleading enemy.” 16. He pleaded, 
“My Lord! I have definitely wronged my soul, so forgive me.” So He 
forgave him, ‘for’ He is indeed the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 17. Moses 
pledged, “My Lord! For all Your favours upon me, I will never side with 
the wicked.” 


The Incident Comes to Light 
18. And so Moses became fearful, watching out in the city, when suddenly 
the one who sought his help the day before cried out to him again for help. 
Moses rebuked him, “Indeed, you are clearly a trouble-maker.” 19. Then 
when Moses was about to lay his hands on their foe,'2%4! the enemy said, “O 
Moses! Do you intend to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You only 
want to be a tyrant in the land. You do not intend to make peace!” 


Moses Escapes to Midian 


20. And there came a man, rushing from the farthest end of the city. He 
said, “O Moses! The chiefs are actually conspiring against you to put you to 
death, so leave ‘the city’. I really advise you "to do so`.” 21. So Moses left 
the city in a state of fear and caution, praying, “My Lord! Deliver me from 
the wrongdoing people.” 22. And as he made his way towards Midian, he 
said, “I trust my Lord will guide me to the right way.” 


Moses Helps Two Women 

23. When he arrived at the well of Midian, he found a group of people 
watering ‘their herds’. Apart from them, he noticed two women holding 
back "their herd’. He asked ‘them’, “What is the problem?” They replied, 
“We cannot water ‘our animals’ until the other’ shepherds are done, for our 
father is a very old man.” 24. So he watered ‘their herd’ for them, then 
withdrew to the shade and prayed, “My Lord! I am truly in ‘desperate’ need 
of whatever provision You may have in store for me” 295] 


Moses Gets Married 

25. Then one of the two women came to him, walking bashfully. She said, 
“My father is inviting you so he may reward you for watering ‘our animals’ 
for us.” When Moses came to him and told him his whole story, the old man 
said, “Have no fear! You are ‘now’ safe from the wrongdoing people.” 26. 
One of the two daughters suggested, “O my dear father! Hire him. The best 
man for employment is definitely the strong and trustworthy ‘one’.” 27. The 
old man proposed, “I wish to marry one of these two daughters of mine to 
you, provided that you stay in my service for eight years. If you complete 
ten, it will be ‘a favour’ from you, but I do not wish to make it difficult for 
you. Allah willing, you will find me an agreeable man.” 28. Moses 
responded, ““Then’ it is ‘settled’ between you and I. Whichever term I 
fulfill, there will be no ‘further’ obligation on me. And Allah is a Witness to 
what we say.” 


The Fateful Encounter 
29. When Moses had completed the term and was travelling with his family, 
he spotted a fire on the side of Mount Tur. He said to his family, “Stay here, 
‘for’ I have spotted a fire. Perhaps from there I can bring you some 
directions'25! or a torch from the fire so you may warm yourselves.” 30. 
But when he came to it, he was called from the bush in the sacred ground to 


the right side of the valley: “O Moses! It is truly I. I am Allah—the Lord of 
all worlds. 31. Now, throw down your staff!” But when he saw it slithering 
like a snake, he ran away without looking back. ‘Allah reassured him,’ “O 
Moses! Draw near, and have no fear. You are perfectly secure. 32. Now put 
your hand through ‘the opening of" your collar, it will come out ‘shining’ 
white, unblemished.!222! And cross your arms tightly to calm your fears.!228! 
These are two proofs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs. They have 
truly been a rebellious people.” 


Moses Asks Allah for Help 
33. Moses appealed, “My Lord! I have indeed killed a man from them, so I 
fear they may kill me. 34. And my brother Aaron is more eloquent than I, 
so send him with me as a helper to support what I say, for I truly fear they 
may reject me.” 35. Allah responded, “We will assist you with your brother 
and grant you both authority, so they cannot harm you. With Our signs, you 
and those who follow you will ‘certainly’ prevail.” 


Pharaoh’s Response 

36. But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said 
‘arrogantly’, “This is nothing but conjured magic ‘tricks’. We have never 
heard of this in ‘the history of’ our forefathers.” 37. Moses responded, “My 
Lord knows best who has come with ‘true’ guidance from Him and will fare 
best in the end. Indeed, the wrongdoers will never succeed.” 38. Pharaoh 
declared, “O chiefs! I know of no other god for you but myself. So bake 
bricks out of clay for me, O Haman, and build a high tower so I may look at 
the God of Moses, although I am sure he is a liar.” 


End of Pharaoh 

39. And so he and his soldiers behaved arrogantly in the land with no right, 
thinking they would never be returned to Us. 40. So We seized him and his 
soldiers, casting them into the sea. See then what was the end of the 
wrongdoers! 41. We made them leaders inviting ‘others’ to the Fire. And on 
the Day of Judgment they will not be helped. 42. We caused a curse to 
follow them in this world. And on the Day of Judgment they will be among 
the outcasts. 


Excellence of the Torah 


43. Indeed, We gave Moses the Scripture—after destroying earlier nations 
—as an insight for the people, a guide, and mercy so perhaps they would be 
mindful. 


Revealed Stories 

44. You were not there "O Prophet’ on the western side of the mountain 
when We entrusted the Commandments to Moses, nor were you present "in 
his time’.!222! 45, But We ‘later’ raised “several” generations, and the ages 
took their toll on them.!82°] Nor were you living among the people of 
Midian, rehearsing Our revelations with them. But it is We Who have sent 
"this revelation to you’. 46. And you were not at the side of Mount Tir 
when We called out "to Moses’. But ‘you have been sent’ as a mercy from 
your Lord to warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so 
perhaps they may be mindful. 47. Also so they would not say, if struck by 
an affliction for what their hands have done: “Our Lord! If only You had 
sent us a Messenger, we would have followed Your revelations and become 
believers.” 


Pagan Response to the Quran 

48. But when the truth came to them from Us, they said, “If only he was 
given the like of what Moses had been given.”!821! Did they not deny what 
had been given to Moses earlier? They claimed, “Both ‘Scriptures’ are 
works of magic, supporting each other!”!822! Adding, “We truly deny both.” 
49. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Bring then a scripture from Allah which is a better 
guide than these two so I may follow it, if your claim is true.” 50. So if they 
fail to respond to you, then know that they only follow their desires. And 
who could be more astray than those who follow their desires with no 
guidance from Allah? Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people. 


The Doubly Rewarded 
51. Indeed, We have steadily delivered the Word ‘of Allah’ to the people so 
they may be mindful. 52. "As for’ those ‘faithful’ to whom We had given the 
Scripture before this "Quran’, they do believe in it. 53. When it is recited to 
them, they declare, “We believe in it. This is definitely the truth from our 
Lord. We had already submitted!823! "even" before this.” 54. These 
"believers’ will be given a double reward for their perseverance, responding 
to evil with good, and for donating from what We have provided for them. 


55. When they hear slanderous talk, they turn away from it, saying, “We are 
accountable for our deeds and you for yours. Peace ‘is our only response’ to 
you! We want nothing to do with those who act ignorantly.” 


Guidance Is from Allah Alone 
56. You surely cannot guide whoever you like "O Prophet’, but it is Allah 
Who guides whoever He wills, and He knows best who are ‘fit to be’ 
guided. 


Pagan Excuses 

57. They say ‘to the Prophet’, “If we were to follow ‘true’ guidance with 
you, we would certainly be snatched away from our land.” Have We not 
established for them a safe haven ‘in Mecca’ to which fruits of all kinds are 
brought as a provision from Us? But most of them do not know ‘this 
favour’. 58. ‘Imagine’ how many societies We have destroyed that had been 
spoiled by their "comfortable" living! Those are their residences, never 
inhabited after them except passingly.'°4! And We ‘alone’ were the 
Successor. 59. Your Lord would never destroy a society until He had sent to 
its capital a messenger, reciting Our revelations to them. Nor would We 
ever destroy a society unless its people persisted in wrongdoing. 


This World or the Hereafter ? 
60. Whatever pleasure’ you have been given is no more than ‘a fleeting’ 
enjoyment and adornment of this worldly life. But what is with Allah is far 
better and more lasting. Will you not then understand? 61. Can those to 
whom We have made a fine promise—which they will see fulfilled—be like 
those who We have allowed to enjoy the pleasures of this worldly life, but 
on the Day of Judgment will be brought "for punishment’? 


The Misleaders and the Misled 
62. "Watch for’ the Day He will call to them, “Where are those you claimed 
were My associate-gods?” 63. Those "misleaders’ against whom the decree 
"of torment’ is justified will cry, “Our Lord! These ‘followers’ are the ones 
we caused to deviate. We led them into deviance, for we ourselves were 
deviant. We disassociate ourselves ‘from them’ before You. It was not us 
that they used to worship.” 64. It will be said ‘to the disbelievers’, “Call 
upon your associate-gods ‘for help’.” So they will call them, but will 


receive no response. And they will face the punishment, wishing they had 
been ‘rightly* guided! 

A Question to the Disbelievers 
65. And ‘watch for’ the Day He will call to them, asking, “What response 
did you give to the messengers?” 66. They will be too dumbstruck on that 
Day to ask one another ‘for answers’. 


The True Believers 
67. As for those who repent, believe, and do good ‘in this world’, it is right 
to hope that they will be among the successful. 


Allah Almighty 
68. Your Lord creates and chooses whatever He wills—the choice is not 
theirs. Glorified and Exalted is Allah above what they associate ‘with Him"! 
69. And your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal. 
70. He is Allah. There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. All praise 
belongs to Him in this life and the next. All authority is His. And to Him 
you will ‘all’ be returned. 


Allah’s Might and Grace 

71. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Imagine if Allah were to make the night 
perpetual for you until the Day of Judgment, which god other than Allah 
could bring you sunlight? Will you not then listen?” 72. Ask ‘them also’, 
“Tmagine if Allah were to make the day perpetual for you until the Day of 
Judgment, which god other than Allah could bring you night to rest in? Will 
you not then see?” 73. It is out of His mercy that He has made for you the 
day and night so that you may rest "in the latter’ and seek His bounty ‘in the 
former’, and perhaps you will be grateful. 


Polytheists Rebuked Again 
74. And ‘watch for’ the Day He will call to them, “Where are those you 
claimed were My associate-gods?” 75. And We will bring forth a 
witness!825! from every faith-community and ask "the polytheists’, “Show 
Us’ your proof.” Then they will ‘come to’ know that the truth is with Allah 
alone’. And whatever ‘gods’ they fabricated will fail them. 


Korah’s Arrogance 


76. Indeed, Korah!®°5] was from the people of Moses, but he behaved 
arrogantly towards them. We had granted him such treasures that even their 


keys would burden a group of strong men. "Some of" his people advised 
him, “Do not be prideful! Surely Allah does not like the prideful. 77. 
Rather, seek the ‘reward’ of the Hereafter by means of what Allah has 
granted you, without forgetting your share of this world. And be good ‘to 
others’ as Allah has been good to you. Do not seek to spread corruption in 
the land, for Allah certainly does not like the corruptors.” 


Korah’s Response 
78. He replied, “I have been granted all this because of some knowledge I 
have.”'892] Did he not know that Allah had already destroyed some from the 
generations before him who were far superior to him in power and greater 
in accumulating ‘wealth’? There will be no need for the wicked to be asked 
about their sins. '88! 


Debate on Korah 
79. Then he came out before his people in all his glamour. Those who 
desired the life of this world wished, “If only we could have something like 
what Korah has been given. He is truly a man of great fortune!” 80. But 
those gifted with knowledge said, “Shame on you! Allah’s reward is far 
better for those who believe and do good. But none will attain this except 
the steadfast.” 


Korah’s End 
81. Then We caused the earth to swallow him up, along with his home. 
There was no one to help him against Allah, nor could he even help 
himself. 82. And those who had craved his position the previous day began 
to say, “Ah! It is certainly Allah Who gives abundant or limited provisions 
to whoever He wills of His servants. Had it not been for the grace of Allah, 
He could have surely caused the earth to swallow us up! Oh, indeed! The 
disbelievers will never succeed.” 
Pay Day 

83. That ‘eternal’ Home in the Hereafter We reserve ‘only’ for those who 
seek neither tyranny nor corruption on the earth. The ultimate outcome 
belongs ‘only’ to the righteous. 84. Whoever comes with a good deed will 
be rewarded with what is better. And whoever comes with an evil deed, 
then the evildoers will only be rewarded for what they used to do. 


Advice to the Prophet 


85. Most certainly, the One Who has ordained the Quran for you will 
"ultimately" bring you back home "to Mecca’.!8°5! Say, “My Lord knows 
best who has come with ‘true’ guidance and who is clearly astray.” 86. You 
never expected this Book to be revealed to you, but "it came’ only ‘as’ a 
mercy from your Lord. So never side with the disbelievers ‘in their 
disbelief’. 87. Do not let them turn you away from the revelations of Allah 
after they have been sent down to you. Rather, invite ‘all’ to "the Way of" 
your Lord, and never be one of the polytheists. 88. And do not invoke any 
other god with Allah. There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. 
Everything is bound to perish except He Himself.'®!2! All authority belongs 
to Him. And to Him you will “all” be returned. 
kkk 


29. The Spider 
(Al-’Ankabit) 


This Meccan sûrah takes its name from the parable of the spider in verse 
41. The beginning of the sirah emphasizes the role of trials and tribulations 
in revealing those who are truly steadfast and those who are not. Noah, 
Abraham, Lot, and Shu’aib are noted for their perseverance. References are 
made to various peoples and the different ways they were destroyed for 
their denial of the truth (verse 40). The pagan arguments against the 
Prophet and the Quran are thoroughly refuted. The sûrah concludes by 
commending those who put their trust in Allah and strive in His cause. This 
conclusion paves the way for the opening of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Test 
1. Alif-Lam-Mim. 2. Do people think once they say, “We believe,” that they 
will be left without being put to the test? 3. We certainly tested those before 
them. And ‘in this way’ Allah will clearly distinguish between those who 
are truthful and those who are liars. 4. Or do the evildoers ‘simply’ think 
that they will escape Us? How wrong is their judgment! 


The True Believers 

5. Whoever hopes for the meeting with Allah, ‘let them know that’ Allah’s 
appointed time is sure to come. He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 6. And 
whoever strives ‘in Allah’s cause’, only does so for their own good. Surely 
Allah is not in need of ‘any of" His creation. 7. As for those who believe 
and do good, We will certainly absolve them of their sins, and reward them 
according to the best of what they used to do. 8. We have commanded 
people to honour their parents. But if they urge you to associate with Me 
what you have no knowledge of,'8!4 then do not obey them. To Me you will 
‘all’ return, and then I will inform you of what you used to do. 9. Those 
who believe and do good will surely be admitted by Us into "the company 
of" the righteous. 


The Hypocrites 


10. There are some who say, “We believe in Allah,” but when they suffer in 
the cause of Allah, they mistake ‘this’ persecution at the hands of people for 
the punishment of Allah. But when victory comes from your Lord, they 
surely say ‘to the believers’, “We have always been with you.” Does Allah 
not know best what is in the hearts of all beings? 11. Allah will certainly 
distinguish between those who have ‘sure’ faith and the hypocrites. 


False Promise 
12. The disbelievers say to the believers, “‘Just’ follow our way, and we 
will bear ‘the burden of’ your sins.” But they would never ‘want to’ bear 
any of the believers’ sins. They are simply lying. 13. Yet they will certainly 
"be made to’ carry their own burdens, as well as other burdens along with 
their own.'®!2! And they will surely be questioned on Judgment Day about 
what they used to fabricate. 


Noah's People Destroyed 
14. Indeed, We sent Noah to his people, and he remained among them for a 
thousand years, less fifty. Then the Flood overtook them, while they 
persisted in wrongdoing. 15. But We delivered him and those in the Ark, 
making it a sign for all people. 


The People of Abraham 
16. And ‘remember’ when Abraham said to his people, “Worship Allah, and 
fear Him. This is better for you, if only you knew. 17. You worship besides 
Allah nothing but idols, simply creating lies ‘about them’. Those you 
worship besides Allah certainly cannot give you any provision. So seek 
provision from Allah ‘alone’, worship Him, and be grateful to Him. To Him 
you will ‘all’ be returned.” 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 
18. If you persist in denial, so did ‘many’ communities before you. The 
Messenger’s duty is only to deliver "the message’ clearly. 19. Have they not 
seen how Allah originates the creation then resurrects it? That is certainly 
easy for Allah. 20. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Travel throughout the land and see 
how He originated the creation, then Allah will bring it into being one more 
time. Surely Allah is Most Capable of everything. 21. He punishes whoever 
He wills, and shows mercy to whoever He wills. And you will ‘all’ be 
returned to Him. 22. And you cannot escape Him on earth or in heaven. Nor 


have you any protector or helper besides Allah.” 23. As for those who 
disbelieve in Allah’s signs and the meeting with Him, it is they who will 
have no hope in His mercy.!®3! And it is they who will suffer a painful 
punishment. 


Abraham Prevails 

24. But the only response of Abraham’s people was to say: “Kill him or 
burn him!” But Allah saved him from the fire.!/4! Surely in this are signs 
for people who believe. 25. He said ‘to his people’, “You have taken idols 
"for worship’ instead of Allah, only to keep ‘the bond of* harmony among 
yourselves in this worldly life. But on the Day of Judgment you will disown 
and curse one another. Your home will be the Fire, and you will have no 
helper!” 26. So Lot believed in him. And Abraham said, “I am emigrating 
"in obedience’ to my Lord. He ‘alone’ is indeed the Almighty, All-Wise.” 
27. We blessed him with Isaac and ‘later’ Jacob, and reserved prophethood 
and revelation for his descendants. We gave him his reward in this life,!845! 
and in the Hereafter he will certainly be among the righteous. 


The People of Lot 

28. And ‘remember’ when Lot rebuked ‘the men of’ his people: “You 
certainly commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before you. 
29. Do you really lust after "other’ men, abuse the travellers, and practice 
immorality ‘openly’ in your gatherings?” His people’s only response was to 
say ‘mockingly’: “Bring Allah’s punishment upon us, if what you say is 
true.” 30. Lot prayed, “My Lord! Help me against the people of 
corruption.” 


Abraham Visited by Angels 
31. When Our messenger-angels came to Abraham with the good news ‘of 
the birth of Isaac’, they said, “We are going to destroy the people of this city 
"of Sodom’, for its people have persisted in wrongdoing.” 32. He said, “But 
Lot is there!” They responded, “We know best who is there. We will 
certainly save him and his family—except his wife, who is one of the 
doomed.” 


The People of Lot Destroyed 
33. And when Our messenger-angels came to Lot, he was distressed and 
worried by their arrival ,|816! They reassured ‘him’, “Do not fear, nor grieve. 


We will surely deliver you and your family—except your wife, who is one 
of the doomed. 34. We are certainly bringing down a punishment from 
heaven upon the people of this city for their rebelliousness.” 35. And We 
did leave ‘some of’ its ruins as a clear lesson for people of understanding. 


Shu'aib's People Destroyed 
36. And to the people of Midian "We sent’ their brother Shu’aib. He said, 
“O my people! Worship Allah, and hope for ‘the reward of" the Last Day. 
And do not go about spreading corruption in the land.” 37. But they rejected 
him, so an ‘overwhelming’ earthquake struck them and they fell lifeless in 
their homes. 


Previously Destroyed Nations 

38. And the people of ’Ad and Thamiid ‘met a similar fate’, which must be 
clear to you "Meccans" from their ruins.'®!2! Satan made their “evil” deeds 
appealing to them, hindering them from the ‘Right’ Way, although they 
were capable of reasoning. 39. "We’ also ‘destroyed’ Korah, Pharaoh, and 
Haman. Indeed, Moses had come to them with clear proofs, but they 
behaved arrogantly in the land. Yet they could not escape ‘Us’. 40. So We 
seized each ‘people’ for their sin: against some of them We sent a storm of 
stones, some were overtaken by a ‘mighty’ blast, some We caused the earth 
to swallow, and some We drowned. Allah would not have wronged them, 
but it was they who wronged themselves. 


Allah Is the Mighty Protector 

41. The parable of those who take protectors other than Allah is that of a 
spider spinning a shelter. And the flimsiest of all shelters is certainly that of 
a spider, if only they knew.'848! 42. Allah surely knows that whatever "gods" 
they invoke besides Him are ‘simply’ nothing. For He is the Almighty, All- 
Wise. 43. These are the parables We set forth for humanity, but none will 
understand them except the people of knowledge. 44. Allah created the 
heavens and the earth for a purpose. Surely in this is a sign for the people of 
faith. 


Advice to the Prophet 
45. Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book and establish prayer. 
Indeed, ‘genuine’ prayer should deter ‘one’ from indecency and wickedness. 


The remembrance of Allah is "an" even greater “deterrent”. And Allah ‘fully’ 
knows what you ‘all’ do. 


Arguing with the People of the Book 
46. Do not argue with the People of the Book unless gracefully, except with 
those of them who act wrongfully. And say, “We believe in what has been 
revealed to us and what was revealed to you. Our God and your God is 
only’ One. And to Him we ‘fully’ submit.” 


One Last Revelation 

47. Similarly "to earlier messengers’, We have revealed to you a Book "O 
Prophet’. "The faithful of" those to whom We gave the Scriptures believe in 
it, as do some of these ‘pagan Arabs’. And none denies Our revelations 
except the ‘stubborn’ disbelievers. 48. You "O Prophet’ could not read any 
writing ‘even’ before this ‘revelation’, nor could you write at all. Otherwise, 
the people of falsehood would have been suspicious. 49. But this ‘Quran’ is 
"a set of’ clear revelations ‘preserved’ in the hearts of those gifted with 
knowledge. And none denies Our revelations except the ‘stubborn’ 
wrongdoers. 


The Pagans Demand Signs!819! 

50. They say, “If only "some’ signs had been sent down to him from his 
Lord!” Say, "O Prophet,’ “Signs are only with Allah. And I am only sent 
with a clear warning.” 51. Is it not enough for them that We have sent down 
to you the Book, ‘which is’ recited to them. Surely in this ‘Quran’ is a 
mercy and reminder for people who believe. 52. Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Sufficient is Allah as a Witness between me and you. He ‘fully’ knows 
whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And those who believe in 
falsehood and disbelieve in Allah, it is they who are the ‘true’ losers.” 


Hastening the Punishment 

53. They challenge you "O Prophet’ to hasten the punishment. Had it not 
been for a time already set, the punishment would have certainly come to 
them ‘at once’. But it will definitely take them by surprise when they least 
expect it. 54. They urge you to hasten the punishment. And Hell will 
certainly encompass the disbelievers 55. on the Day the punishment will 
overwhelm them from above them and from below their feet. And it will be 
said, “Reap what you sowed.” 


Advice to Persecuted Believers!822l 

56. O My believing servants! My earth is truly spacious, so worship Me 
‘alone’. 57. Every soul will taste death, then to Us you will ‘all’ be returned. 
58. ‘As for’ those who believe and do good, We will certainly house them in 
elevated’ mansions in Paradise, under which rivers flow, to stay there 
forever. How excellent is the reward for those who work ‘righteousness! "— 
59. those who patiently endure, and put their trust in their Lord! 60. How 
many are the creatures that cannot secure their provisions! "It is* Allah 
"Who" provides for them and you ‘as well’. He is indeed the All-Hearing, 
All-Knowing. 


Questions to the Polytheists 

61. If you ask them "O Prophet’ who created the heavens and the earth and 
subjected the sun and the moon ‘for your benefit’, they will certainly say, 
“Allah!” How can they then be deluded ‘from the truth’? 62. Allah gives 
abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills of His servants. Surely 
Allah has ‘full’ knowledge of everything. 63. And if you ask them who 
sends down rain from the sky, giving life to the earth after its death, they 
will surely say, “Allah!” Say, “Praise be to Allah!” In fact, most of them do 
not understand. 64. This worldly life is no more than play and amusement. 
But the Hereafter is indeed the real life, if only they knew. 


The Disbelievers' Ingratitude 
65. If they happen to be aboard a ship ‘caught in a storm’, they cry out to 
Allah ‘alone’ in sincere devotion. But as soon as He delivers them ‘safely’ 
to shore, they associate ‘others with Him once again’. 66. So let them be 
ungrateful for all We have given them, and ‘let them’ enjoy themselves "for 
now! For they will soon know. 

Warning to Meccan Pagans 
67. Have they not seen how We have made ‘Mecca’ a safe haven, whereas 
people “all” around them are snatched away?!8%] How can they then believe 
in falsehood'822! and deny Allah’s favours? 68. And who does more wrong 
than those who fabricate lies against Allah or reject the truth after it has 
reached them? Is Hell not a ‘fitting’ home for the disbelievers? 


The Faithful Reassured 


69. As for those who struggle in Our cause, We will surely guide them 
along Our Way. And Allah is certainly with the good-doers. 
oie ke ke 


30. The Romans 
(Ar-Rûm) 


This Meccan sirah takes its name from the reference to the Romans in verse 
2. The world’s superpowers in the early 7 century were the Roman 
Byzantine and Persian Empires. When they went to war in 614 C.E., the 
Romans suffered a devastating defeat. The Meccan pagans rejoiced at the 
defeat of the Roman Christians at the hands of the Persian pagans. Soon 
verses 30:1-5 were revealed, stating that the Romans would be victorious in 
three to nine years. Eight years later, the Romans won a decisive battle 
against the Persians, reportedly on the same day the Muslims vanquished 
the Meccan army at the Battle of Badr. As the sûrah progresses, several 
blessings and natural signs are cited to prove Allah’s infinite mercy and 
power, coupled with condemnations to the pagans for their ingratitude and 
for associating powerless/igigls with Allah in worship. The sûrah closes by 
bidding the Prophet ( Seb) not to be disheartened by what the deniers 
say. oe? 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


From Defeat to Victory 

1. Alif-Ldm-Mim. 2. The Romans have been defeated 3. in a nearby land. 
[823] Yet following their defeat, they will triumph 4. within three to nine 
years. The ‘whole’ matter rests with Allah before and after ‘victory’. And on 
that day the believers will rejoice 5. at the victory willed by Allah. He gives 
victory to whoever He wills. For He is the Almighty, Most Merciful. 6. 
"This is’ the promise of Allah. "And’ Allah never fails in His promise. But 
most people do not know. 7. They ‘only’ know the worldly affairs of this 
life, but are ‘totally’ oblivious to the Hereafter. 


Wake-up Call to the Disbelievers 
8. Have they not reflected upon their own being? Allah only created the 
heavens and the earth and everything in between for a purpose and an 
appointed term. Yet most people are truly in denial of the meeting with their 
Lord! 9. Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the 


end of those "destroyed" before them? They were far superior in might; they 
cultivated the land and developed it more than these ‘Meccans’ ever have. 
Their messengers came to them with clear proofs. Allah would have never 
wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves. 10. Then most evil 
was the end of the evildoers for denying and mocking the signs of Allah. 


The Wicked on Judgment Day 
11. It is Allah Who originates the creation, and will resurrect it. And then to 
Him you will ‘all’ be returned. 12. On the Day the Hour will arrive, the 
wicked will be dumbstruck. 13. There will be no intercessors for them from 
among their associate-gods, and they will ‘totally’ deny their associate- 
gods. 


The Blessed and the Doomed 
14, And on the Day the Hour will arrive, the people will then be split ‘into 
two groups’. 15. As for those who believed and did good, they will be 
rejoicing in a Garden. 16. And as for those who disbelieved, and denied Our 
signs and the meeting "with Allah’ in the Hereafter, they will be confined in 
punishment. 
Keeping up Prayers 

17. So glorify Allah in the evening and in the morning— 18. all praise is for 


Him in the heavens and the earth—as well as in the afternoon, and at noon. 
[824] 


Allah’s Power over Life and Death 
19. He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. 
And He gives life to the earth after its death. And so will you be brought 
forth ‘from the grave’. 


Allah’s Signs 1) Creation of Humankind 
20. One of His signs is that He created you from dust, then—behold!—you 
are human beings spreading over ‘the earth’. 


Allah’s Signs 2) Spouses 
21. And one of His signs is that He created for you spouses from among 
yourselves so that you may find comfort in them. And He has placed 
between you compassion and mercy. Surely in this are signs for people who 
reflect. 


Allah’s Signs 3) Diversity 
22. And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and 
the diversity of your languages and colours. Surely in this are signs for 
those of ‘sound’ knowledge. 


Allah’s Signs 4) Sleep and Work 
23. And one of His signs is your sleep by night and by day ‘for rest’ as well 
as your seeking His bounty ‘in both’. Surely in this are signs for people who 
listen. 
Allah’s Signs 5) Lightning 

24. And one of His signs is that He shows you lightning, inspiring "you 
with" hope and fear.'®25! And He sends down rain from the sky, reviving the 
earth after its death. Surely in this are signs for people who understand. 


Allah’s Signs 6) The Universe 

25. And one of His signs is that the heavens and the earth persist by His 
command. Then when He calls you out of the earth just once, you will 
instantly come forth. 26. And to Him belong all those in the heavens and 
the earth—all are subject to His Will.!828] 27. And He is the One Who 
originates the creation then will resurrect it—which is even easier for Him. 
[827] To Him belong the finest attributes in the heavens and the earth. And 
He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 


An Example for the Polytheists 

28. He sets forth for you an example ‘drawn’ from your own lives: would 
you allow some of those "bondspeople’ in your possession to be your equal 
partners in whatever ‘wealth’ We have provided you, keeping them in mind 
as you are mindful of your peers?!£28! This is how We make the signs clear 
for people who understand. 29. In fact, the wrongdoers merely follow their 
desires with no knowledge. Who then can guide those Allah has left to 
stray? They will have no helpers. 


Hold Firmly to Faith 
30. So be steadfast in faith in all uprightness "O Prophet’“—the natural Way 
of Allah which He has instilled in ‘all’ people. Let there be no change in 
this creation of Allah. That is the Straight Way, but most people do not 
know. 31. "O believers!” Always turn to Him "in repentance’, be mindful of 
Him, and establish prayers. And do not be polytheists— 32. ‘like’ those 


who have divided their faith and split into sects, each rejoicing in what they 
have. 


Human Ingratitude 
33. When people are touched with hardship, they cry out to their Lord, 
turning to Him ‘alone’. But as soon as He gives them a taste of His mercy, a 
group of them associates ‘others’ with their Lord ‘in worship’, 34. becoming 
ungrateful for whatever ‘favours’ We have given them. So enjoy yourselves, 
for soon you will know. 35. Or have We sent down to them an authority 
which attests to what they associate "with Him’? 


Human Impatience 
36. If We give people a taste of mercy, they become prideful "because' of it. 
But if they are afflicted with an evil for what their hands have done, they 
instantly fall into despair. 


Interest vs. Charity 

37. Have they not seen that Allah gives abundant or limited provisions to 
whoever He wills? Surely in this are signs for people who believe. 38. So 
give your close relatives their due, as well as the poor and the ‘needy’ 
traveller. That is best for those who seek the pleasure of Allah,!822! and it is 
they who will be successful. 39. Whatever loans you give, ‘only’ seeking 
interest at the expense of people’s wealth!®22! will not increase with Allah. 
But whatever charity you give, ‘only’ seeking the pleasure of Allah—it is 
they whose reward will be multiplied. 


Allah’s Might 
40. It is Allah Who created you, then gives you provisions, then will cause 
you to die, and then will bring you back to life. Can any of your associate- 
gods do any of this? Glorified and Exalted is He above what they associate 
with Him ‘in worship"! 
The Spread of Corruption 

41. Corruption has spread on land and sea as a result of what people’s hands 
have done, so that Allah may cause them to taste "the consequences of' 
some of their deeds and perhaps they might return ‘to the Right Path’. 42. 
Say, "O Prophet,’ “Travel throughout the land and see what was the end of 
those ‘destroyed’ before "you'—most of them were polytheists.” 


The Successful and the Losers 


43. So be steadfast in the Upright Faith "O Prophet’, before the coming of a 
Day from Allah that cannot be averted. On that Day the people will be 
divided: 44. those who disbelieved will bear ‘the burden of’ their own 
disbelief; and those who did good will have prepared for themselves 
“eternal homes’, 45. so that He may ‘generously’ reward those who believe 
and do good, out of His grace. He truly does not like the disbelievers. 


Allah’s Signs 7) The Wind 
46. And one of His signs is that He sends the winds, ushering in good news 
"of rain’ so that He may give you a taste of His mercy, and that ships may 
sail by His command, and that you may seek His bounty, and perhaps you 
will be grateful. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 
47. Indeed, We sent before you "O Prophet’ messengers, each to their own 
people, and they came to them with clear proofs. Then We inflicted 
punishment upon those who persisted in wickedness. For it is Our duty to 
help the believers. 


Allah’s Signs 8) Rain 

48. It is Allah Who sends the winds, which then stir up ‘vapour, forming” 
clouds, which He then spreads out in the sky or piles up into masses as He 
wills, from which you see rain come forth. Then as soon as He causes it to 
fall on whoever He wills of His servants, they rejoice, 49. although they had 
utterly lost hope just before it was sent down to them. 50. See then the 
impact of Allah’s mercy: how He gives life to the earth after its death! 
Surely That "same Creator’ can raise the dead. For He is Most Capable of 
everything. 51. Then if We send a ‘harsh’ wind which they see withering 
‘their’ crops, they will definitely deny ‘old favours’ right after. 


The Dead, Deaf, and Blind 
52. So you "O Prophet’ certainly cannot make the dead hear ‘the truth’. Nor 
can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and walk 
away. 53. Nor can you lead the blind out of their misguidance. You can 
make none hear ‘the truth’ except those who believe in Our revelations, 
“fully* submitting ‘to Allah’. 


Allah’s Power of Creation 


54. It is Allah Who created you in a state of weakness, then developed 
“your” weakness into strength, then developed ‘your’ strength into weakness 
and old age.'831! He creates whatever He wills. For He is the All-Knowing, 
Most Capable. 
Fleeting Life 

55. And on the Day the Hour will arrive, the wicked will swear that they did 
not stay “in this world’ more than an hour. In this way they were always 
deluded ‘in the world’. 56. But those gifted with knowledge and faith will 
say ‘to them’, “You did actually stay—as destined by Allah—until the Day 
of Resurrection. So here is the Day of Resurrection “which you denied"! But 
you did not know ‘it was true’.” 57. So on that Day the wrongdoers’ 
excuses will not benefit them, nor will they be allowed to appease ‘their 
Lord’. 


Advice to the Prophet 
58. We have certainly set forth every ‘kind of’ lesson for people in this 
Quran. And no matter what sign you bring to them "O Prophet’, the 
disbelievers will definitely say "to the believers’, “You are only a people of 
falsehood.” 59. This is how Allah seals the hearts of those unwilling to 
know ‘the truth’. 60. So be patient, for the promise of Allah certainly is true. 
And do not be disturbed by those who have no sure faith. 
oie ke ke 


31. Luqman 
(Luqmân) 


This Meccan sûrah is named after Luqmân, a wise African man who is 
quoted giving pieces of advice to his son (verses 12-19) on one’s 
relationship with Allah and the people. While the believers are praised, the 
pagans are condemned for their ingratitude, distracting others from the 
Way of Allah, and for setting up idols as His equals. Similar to the previous 
sûrah, references are made to Allah’s natural marvels, challenging the 
deniers to point out anything their gods have created. The strah concludes 
by warning humanity of the Day of Judgment, ushering in the next strah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Qualities of True Believers 
1. Alif-Ladm-Mim. 2. These are the verses of the Book, rich in wisdom. 3. "It 
is' a guide and mercy for the good-doers— 4. those who establish prayer, 
pay alms-tax, and have sure faith in the Hereafter. 5. It is they who are 
“truly’ guided by their Lord, and it is they who will be successful. 


Distracting People from the Truth 
6. But there are some who employ theatrics,'822! only to lead others away 
from Allah’s Way—without any knowledge—and to make a mockery of it. 
They will suffer a humiliating punishment. 7. Whenever Our revelations are 
recited to them, they turn away in arrogance as if they did not hear them, as 
if there is deafness in their ears. So give them good news "O Prophet’ of a 
painful punishment. 


Reward of the Believers 
8. Surely those who believe and do good will have the Gardens of Bliss, 9. 
staying there forever. Allah’s promise is true. And He is the Almighty, All- 
Wise. 


Allah’s Creation 
10. He created the heavens without pillars—as you can see—and placed 
firm mountains upon the earth so it does not shake with you, and scattered 
throughout it all types of creatures. And We send down rain from the sky, 


causing every type of fine plant to grow on earth. 11. This is Allah’s 
creation. Now show Me what those ‘gods’ other than Him have created. In 
fact, the wrongdoers are clearly astray. 


Luqman’s Advice: 1) Worship Allah Alone 
12. Indeed, We blessed Luqmân with wisdom, ‘saying’, “Be grateful to 
Allah, for whoever is grateful, it is only for their own good. And whoever is 
ungrateful, then surely Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.”!8331. 13. And 
‘remember’ when Luqman said to his son, while advising him, “O my dear 
son! Never associate ‘anything’ with Allah ‘in worship’, for associating 
‘others with Him’ is truly the worst of all wrongs.” 


2) Honour Your Parents!8341 

14. And We have commanded people to ‘honour’ their parents. Their 
mothers bore them through hardship upon hardship, and their weaning takes 
two years. So be grateful to Me and your parents. To Me is the final return. 
15. But if they pressure you to associate with Me what you have no 
knowledge of,!825! do not obey them. Still keep their company in this world 
courteously, and follow the way of those who turn to Me ‘in devotion’. 
Then to Me you will ‘all’ return, and then I will inform you of what you 
used to do. 


3) Know That Allah Will Judge All Deeds 
16. "Luqman added,’ “O my dear son! ‘Even’ if a deed were the weight of a 
mustard seed—be it "hidden’ in a rock or in the heavens or the earth—Allah 
will bring it forth. Surely Allah is Most Subtle, All-Aware. 


4) Fulfil Your Duty to Allah 
17. “O my dear son! Establish prayer, encourage what is good and forbid 
what is evil, and endure patiently whatever befalls you. Surely this is a 
resolve to aspire to. 
5) Be Humble 

18. “And do not turn your nose up to people, nor walk pridefully upon the 
earth. Surely Allah does not like whoever is arrogant, boastful. 19. Be 
moderate in your pace. And lower your voice, for the ugliest of all voices is 
certainly the braying of donkeys.” 


Allah’s Favours 


20. Have you not seen that Allah has subjected for you whatever is in the 
heavens and whatever is on the earth, and has lavished His favours upon 
you, both seen and unseen? ‘Still’ there are some who dispute about Allah 
without knowledge, or guidance, or an enlightening scripture. 21. When it is 
said to them, “Follow what Allah has revealed,” they reply, “No! We ‘only’ 
follow what we found our forefathers practicing.” "Would they still do so’ 
even if Satan is inviting them to the torment of the Blaze? 


The Believers and the Disbelievers 

22. Whoever fully submits themselves to Allah and is a good-doer, they 
have certainly grasped the firmest hand-hold. And with Allah rests the 
outcome of ‘all’ affairs. 23. But whoever disbelieves, do not let their 
disbelief grieve you "O Prophet’. To Us is their return, and We will inform 
them of all they did. Surely Allah knows best what is "hidden’ in the heart. 
24. We allow them enjoyment for a little while, then ‘in time’ We will force 
them into a harsh torment. 25. And if you ask them who created the heavens 
and the earth, they will definitely say, “Allah!” Say, “Praise be to Allah!” In 
fact, most of them do not know. 


Allah’s Infinite Knowledge 
26. To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Allah is truly 
the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. 27. If all the trees on earth were pens and 
the ocean ‘were ink’, refilled by seven other oceans, the Words of Allah 
would not be exhausted. Surely Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 


Allah’s Infinite Power 

28. The creation and resurrection of you ‘all’ is as simple ‘for Him’ as that 
of a single soul. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 29. Do you not see 
that Allah causes the night to merge into the day and the day into the night, 
and has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed 
term, and that Allah is All-Aware of what you do? 30. That is because Allah 
‘alone’ is the Truth and what they invoke besides Him is falsehood, and 
"because’ Allah ‘alone’ is the Most High, All-Great. 


Human Ingratitude 
31. Do you not see that the ships sail ‘smoothly’ through the sea by the 
grace of Allah so that He may show you some of His signs? Surely in this 
are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful. 32. And as soon as they are 


overwhelmed by waves like mountains, they cry out to Allah ‘alone’ in 
sincere devotion. But when He delivers them ‘safely’ to shore, only some 
become relatively grateful. And none rejects Our signs except whoever is 
deceitful, ungrateful. 


Warning of Judgment Day 
33. O humanity! Be mindful of your Lord, and beware of a Day when no 
parent will be of any benefit to their child, nor will a child be of any benefit 
to their parent. Surely Allah’s promise is true. So do not let the life of this 
world deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver'®25! deceive you about Allah. 


The Five Keys of the Unseen!832! 
34. Indeed, Allah ‘alone’ has the knowledge of the Hour. He sends down the 
rain,!838! and knows what is in the wombs.!£22! No soul knows what it will 
earn for tomorrow, and no soul knows in what land it will die. Surely Allah 
is All-Knowing, All-Aware. 
2k 2K ok 


32. The Prostration 
(As-Sajdah) 


This Meccan sûrah, which takes its name from the prostrations of the 
believers in worship mentioned in verse 15, makes it clear that the Quran is 
a divine revelation and that Almighty Allah is the sole Creator, most 
capable of resurrection. Similar to the previous sûrah, a reference is made 
to the qualities of the believers and the disbelievers and the reward 
awaiting each. Botts the end of this sûrah and the beginning of the next urge 
the Prophet ( Heb) to turn away from the deniers and not yield to them. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Reassuring the Prophet 
1. Alif-Ldm-Mim. 2. The revelation of this Book is—beyond doubt—from 
the Lord of all worlds. 3. Or do they say, “He has fabricated it!”? No! It is 
the truth from your Lord in order for you to warn a people to whom no 
warner has come before you, so they may be ‘rightly’ guided. 


Allah’s Power of Creation 

4. It is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth and everything in 
between in six Days,'®4°! then established Himself on the Throne. You have 
no protector or intercessor besides Him. Will you not then be mindful? 5. 
He conducts every affair from the heavens to the earth, then it all ascends to 
Him on a Day whose length is a thousand years by your counting. 6. That is 
the Knower of the seen and unseen—the Almighty, Most Merciful, 7. Who 
has perfected everything He created. And He originated the creation of 
humankind from clay.'®41! 8. Then He made his descendants from an extract 
of a humble fluid, 9. then He fashioned them and had a spirit of His Own 
‘creation’ breathed into them. And He gave you hearing, sight, and intellect. 
"Yet' you hardly give any thanks. 


The Deniers of Resurrection 
10. ‘Still’ they ask ‘mockingly’, “When we are disintegrated into the earth, 
will we really be raised as a new creation?” In fact, they are in denial of the 
meeting with their Lord. 11. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Your soul will be taken by 


the Angel of Death, who is in charge of you. Then to your Lord you will 
‘all’ be returned.” 12. If only you could see the wicked hanging their heads 
"in shame’ before their Lord, ‘crying:’ “Our Lord! We have now seen and 
heard, so send us back and we will do good. We truly have sure faith 
“now!” 13. Had We willed, We could have easily imposed guidance on 
every soul. But My Word will come to pass: I will surely fill up Hell with 
jinn and humans all together. 14. So taste "the punishment’ for neglecting 
the meeting of this Day of yours. We ‘too’ will certainly neglect you. And 
taste the torment of eternity for what you used to do! 


Qualities of the Believers 
15. The only ‘true’ believers in Our revelation are those who—when it is 
recited to them—fall into prostration and glorify the praises of their Lord 
and are not too proud. 16. They abandon their beds, invoking their Lord 
with hope and fear, and donate from what We have provided for them. 17. 
No soul can imagine what delights are kept in store for them as a reward for 
what they used to do. 


The Faithful and the Rebellious 
18. Is the one who is a believer equal "before Allah’ to the one who is 
rebellious? They are not equal! 19. As for those who believe and do good, 
they will have the Gardens of "Eternal’ Residence—as an accommodation 
for what they used to do. 20. But as for those who are rebellious, the Fire 
will be their home. Whenever they try to escape from it, they will be forced 
back into it, and will be told, “Taste the Fire’s torment, which you used to 
deny.” 21. We will certainly make them taste some of the minor torment "in 
this life’ before the major torment ‘of the Hereafter’, so perhaps they will 
return ‘to the Right Path’. 22. And who does more wrong than the one who 
is reminded of Allah’s revelations then turns away from them? We will 
surely inflict punishment upon the wicked. 
Divine Revelations 

23. Indeed, We gave the Scripture to Moses—so let there be no doubt "O 
Prophet” that you ‘too’ are receiving revelations—'®#land We made it a 
guide for the Children of Israel. 24. We raised from among them leaders, 
[843] guiding by Our command, when they patiently endured and firmly 


believed in Our signs. 25. Indeed, your Lord will decide between them on 
the Day of Judgment regarding their differences. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 
26. Is it not yet clear to them how many peoples We destroyed before them, 
whose ruins they still pass by? Surely in this are signs. Will they not then 
listen? 27. Do they not see how We drive rain to parched land, producing 
various’ crops from which they and their cattle eat? Will they not then see? 


The Deniers of Judgment 
28. They ask "mockingly’, “When is this "Day of final’ Decision, if what 
you Say is true?” 29. Say, "O Prophet,’ “On the Day of Decision it will not 
benefit the disbelievers to believe then, nor will they be delayed ‘from 
punishment’.” 30. So turn away from them, and wait! They too are waiting. 
kkk 


33. The Enemy Alliance 
(AI-A hzab) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name from the enemy alliance (mentioned in 
verses 9-27) which laid a siege around Medina during the Battle of the 
Trench in 5 A.H./627 C.E. While the believers are reminded of Allah’s aid 
against the enemy alliance, the hypocrites are condemned repeatedly. The 
sûrah provides social guidelines regarding gfapion, divorce, modesty, and 
the etiquette of dealing with the Prophet ( .{z-/;) and his wives. In view of 
Allah’s favours to the believers (nelad is forgiveness and generous 
reward at the end of the sûrah), the next sûrah starts off with praises to 
Allah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Orders to the Prophet 
1. O Prophet! ‘Always’ be mindful of Allah, and do not yield to the 
disbelievers and the hypocrites. Indeed, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 2. 
Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord. Surely Allah is All-Aware 
of what you ‘all’ do. 3. And put your trust in Allah, for Allah is sufficient as 
a Trustee of Affairs. 


Rules on Divorce and Adoption!8“! 


4. Allah does not place two hearts in any person’s chest. Nor does He 
regard your wives as ‘unlawful for you like’ your real mothers, ‘even’ if you 
say they are.'845! Nor does He regard your adopted children as your real 
children.!846! These are only your baseless assertions. But Allah declares the 
truth, and He ‘alone’ guides to the ‘Right’ Way. 5. Let your adopted children 
keep their family names. That is more just in the sight of Allah. But if you 
do not know their fathers, then they are ‘simply’ your fellow believers and 
close associates. There is no blame on you for what you do by mistake, but 
‘only’ for what you do intentionally. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 


Guidelines for the Believers 


6. The Prophet has a stronger affinity to the believers than they do 
themselves. And his wives are their mothers. As ordained by Allah, blood 
relatives are more entitled ‘to inheritance’ than ‘other’ believers and 
immigrants, unless you ‘want to’ show kindness to your ‘close’ associates 
"through bequest’.!842! This is decreed in the Record.!848! 


Covenant to Deliver the Truth 
7. And ‘remember’ when We took a covenant from the prophets, as well as 
from you "O Prophet’, and from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, son of 
Mary. We did take a solemn covenant from ‘all of’ them 8. so that He may 
question these men of truth about their ‘delivery of the’ truth. And He has 
prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers. 


The Battle of the Trench 

9. O believers! Remember Allah’s favour upon you when "enemy" forces 
came to “besiege” you "in Medina’,'842! so We sent against them a "bitter 
wind and forces you could not see.!852! And Allah is All-Seeing of what you 
do. 10. "Remember" when they came at you from east and west,!®2! when 
your eyes grew wild ‘in horror’ and your hearts jumped into your throats, 
and you entertained ‘conflicting’ thoughts about Allah.'852! 11. Then and 
there the believers were put to the test, and were violently shaken. 


Stance of the Hypocrites 

12. And ‘remember’ when the hypocrites and those with sickness in their 
hearts said, “Allah and His Messenger have promised us nothing but 
delusion!” 13. And ‘remember’ when a group of them said, “O people of 
Yathrib!'®53] There is no point in you staying "here", so retreat!” Another 
group of them asked the Prophet’s permission ‘to leave’, saying, “Our 
homes are vulnerable,” while ‘in fact’ they were not vulnerable. They only 
wished to flee. 14. Had their city been sacked from all sides and they had 
been asked to abandon faith, they would have done so with little hesitation. 


Warning to the Hypocrites 
15. They had already pledged to Allah earlier never to turn their backs ‘in 
retreat’. And a pledge to Allah must be answered for. 16. Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Fleeing will not benefit you if you ‘try to’ escape a natural or violent death. 
‘If it is not your time,’ you will only be allowed enjoyment for a little 
while.”!854! 17, Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Who can put you out of Allah’s 


reach if He intends to harm you or show you mercy?” They can never find 
any protector or helper besides Allah. 


Hypocritical Tactics 

18. Allah knows well those among you who discourage ‘others from 
fighting’, saying ‘secretly’ to their brothers, “Stay with us,” and who 
themselves hardly take part in fighting. 19. "They are’ totally unwilling to 
assist you. When danger comes, you see them staring at you with their eyes 
rolling like someone in the throes of death. But once the danger is over, 
they slash you with razor-sharp tongues, ravenous for ‘worldly’ gains. Such 
people have not ‘truly’ believed, so Allah has rendered their deeds void. 
And that is easy for Allah. 


Hypocrites Paranoid 
20. They ‘still’ think that the enemy alliance has not ‘yet’ withdrawn. And if 
the allies were to come ‘again’, the hypocrites would wish to be away in the 
desert among nomadic Arabs, ‘only’ asking for news about you ‘believers’. 
And if the hypocrites were in your midst, they would hardly take part in the 
fight. 


The Prophet as a Role Model 
21. Indeed, in the Messenger of Allah you have an excellent example for 
whoever has hope in Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah often. 


Stance of the Believers 

22. When the believers saw the enemy alliance, they said, “This is what 
Allah and His Messenger had promised us. The promise of Allah and His 
Messenger has come true.” And this only increased them in faith and 
submission. 23. Among the believers are men who have proven true to what 
they pledged to Allah.'855] Some of them have fulfilled their pledge ‘with 
their lives’, others are waiting ‘their turn’. They have never changed ‘their 
commitment’ in the least. 24. ‘It all happened’ so Allah may reward the 
faithful for their faithfulness, and punish the hypocrites if He wills or turn 
to them "in mercy’. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Defeat of the Enemy Alliance 
25. And Allah drove back the disbelievers in their rage, totally empty- 
handed. And Allah spared the believers from fighting. For Allah is All- 
Powerful, Almighty. 26. And He brought down those from the People of the 


Book'®26! who supported the enemy alliance from their own strongholds, 
and cast horror into their hearts. You ‘believers’ killed some, and took 
others captive. 27. He has also caused you to take over their lands, homes, 
and wealth, as well as lands you have not yet set foot on. And Allah is Most 
Capable of everything. 


Advice to the Prophet’s Wives: Your Choice 
28. O Prophet! Say to your wives, “If you desire the life of this world and 
its luxury, then come, I will give you a ‘suitable’ compensation ‘for divorce’ 
and let you go graciously. 29. But if you desire Allah and His Messenger 
and the ‘everlasting’ Home of the Hereafter, then Surely Allah has prepared 
a great reward for those of you who do good.” 


More Advice: Your Reward 
30. O wives of the Prophet! If any of you were to commit a blatant 
misconduct, the punishment would be doubled for her. And that is easy for 
Allah. 31. And whoever of you devoutly obeys Allah and His Messenger 
and does good, We will grant her double the reward, and We have prepared 
for her an honourable provision. 


More Advice: Your Modesty 

32. O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women: if you are 
mindful ‘of Allah’, then do not be overly effeminate in speech ‘with men’ or 
those with sickness in their hearts may be tempted, but speak in a moderate 
tone. 33. Settle in your homes, and do not display yourselves as women did 
in the days of ‘pre-Islamic’ ignorance. Establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and 
obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah only intends to keep ‘the causes of" 
evil away from you and purify you completely, O members of the 
"Prophet’s’ family! 34. "Always" remember what is recited in your homes of 
Allah’s revelations and ‘prophetic’ wisdom.'®2! Surely Allah is Most 
Subtle, All-Aware. 


Reward of the Righteous 
35. Surely "for Muslim men and women, believing men and women,|28! 
devout men and women, truthful men and women, patient men and women, 
humble men and women, charitable men and women, fasting men and 
women, men and women who guard their chastity, and men and women 


who remember Allah often—for ‘all of’ them Allah has prepared 
forgiveness and a great reward. 


Unconditional Obedience 
36. It is not for a believing man or woman—when Allah and His Messenger 
decree a matter—to have any other choice in that matter.'®°2! Indeed, 
whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger has clearly gone ‘far’ astray. 


The Case of Zaid 

37. And ‘remember, O Prophet,’ when you said to the one!889! for whom 
Allah has done a favour and you “too” have done a favour, 8! “Keep your 
wife and fear Allah,” while concealing within yourself what Allah was 
going to reveal. And "so` you were considering the people, whereas Allah 
was more worthy of your consideration. So when Zaid totally lost interest in 
"keeping’ his wife, We gave her to you in marriage, so that there would be 
no blame on the believers for marrying the ex-wives of their adopted sons 
after their divorce. And Allah’s command is totally binding. 38. There is no 
blame on the Prophet for doing what Allah has ordained for him. That has 
been the way of Allah with those ‘prophets’ who had gone before. And 
Allah’s command has been firmly decreed. 39. "That is His way with’ those 
prophets’ who deliver the messages of Allah, and consider Him, and none 
but Allah. And sufficient is Allah as a ‘vigilant’ Reckoner. 40. Muhammad 
is not the father of any of your men,'8°! but is the Messenger of Allah and 
the seal of the prophets. And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


Reward of the Believers 
41. O believers! Always remember Allah often, 42. and glorify Him 
morning and evening. 43. He is the One Who showers His blessings upon 
you—and His angels pray for you—-so that He may bring you out of 
darkness and into light. For He is ever Merciful to the believers. 44. Their 
greeting on the Day they meet Him will be, “Peace!” And He has prepared 
for them an honourable reward. 


Excellence of the Prophet 
45. O Prophet! We have sent you as a witness, and a deliverer of good 
news, and a warner, 46. and a caller to ‘the Way of’ Allah by His command, 
and a beacon of light. 47. Give good news to the believers that they will 
have a great bounty from Allah. 48. Do not yield to the disbelievers and the 


hypocrites. Overlook their annoyances, and put your trust in Allah. For 
Allah is sufficient as a Trustee of Affairs. 


Divorce Before Consummation 
49. O believers! If you marry believing women and then divorce them 
before you touch them,!®3! they will have no waiting period for you to 
count,'854] so give them a ‘suitable’ compensation, and let them go 
graciously. 


Women Lawful to the Prophet 

50. O Prophet! We have made lawful for you your wives to whom you have 
paid their ‘full’ dowries as well as those ‘bondwomen’ in your possession, 
whom Allah has granted you.'865! And ‘you are allowed to marry” the 
daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and the daughters of your 
maternal uncles and aunts, who have emigrated like you. Also ‘allowed for 
marriage is’ a believing woman who offers herself to the Prophet ‘without 
dowry’ if he is interested in marrying her—this is’ exclusively for you, not 
for the rest of the believers.'85°] We know well what ‘rulings’ We have 
ordained for the believers in relation to their wives and those "bondwomen’ 
in their possession. As such, there would be no blame on you. And Allah is 
All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Prophet’s Visitation to His Wives 
51. It is up to you "O Prophet’ to delay or receive whoever you please of 
your wives. There is no blame on you if you call back any of those you 
have set aside.!887] That is more likely that they will be content, not grieved, 
and satisfied with what you offer them all. Allah ‘fully’ knows what is in 
your hearts. And Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing. 


No Future Marriages 
52. It is not lawful for you "O Prophet’ to marry more women after this, nor 
can you replace any of your present wives with another, even if her beauty 
may attract you—except those "bondwomen’ in your possession. And Allah 
is ever Watchful over all things. 


On Visiting the Prophet 
53. O believers! Do not enter the homes of the Prophet without permission 
‘and if invited’ for a meal, do not ‘come too early and’ linger until the meal 
is ready. But if you are invited, then enter "on time’. Once you have eaten, 


then go on your way, and do not stay for casual talk. Such behaviour is truly 
annoying to the Prophet, yet he is too shy to ask you to leave. But Allah is 
never shy of the truth. And when you ‘believers’ ask his wives for 
something, ask them from behind a barrier. This is purer for your hearts and 
theirs. And it is not right for you to annoy the Messenger of Allah, nor ever 
marry his wives after him. This would certainly be a major offence in the 
sight of Allah. 54. Whether you reveal something or conceal it, surely Allah 
has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 55. There is no blame on the 
Prophet’s wives "if they appear unveiled” before their fathers,!®8! their sons, 
their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their fellow ‘Muslim’ 
women, and those "bondspeople’ in their possession. And be mindful of 
Allah "O wives of the Prophet!” Surely Allah is a Witness over all things. 


Blessings on the Prophet 
56. Indeed, Allah showers His blessings upon the Prophet, and His angels 
pray for him. O believers! Invoke Allah’s blessings upon him, and salute 
him with worthy greetings of peace. 


Offending Allah, His Messenger, and the Believers 
57. Surely those who offend Allah] and His Messenger'82! are 
condemned by Allah in this world and the Hereafter. And He has prepared 
for them a humiliating punishment. 58. As for those who abuse believing 
men and women!®21! unjustifiably, they will definitely bear the guilt of 
slander and blatant sin. 


The Veil 
59. O Prophet! Ask your wives, daughters, and believing women to draw 
their cloaks over their bodies. In this way it is more likely that they will be 
recognized ‘as virtuous’ and not be harassed. And Allah is All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful.!822! 


Reward of the Wicked 
60. If the hypocrites, and those with sickness in their hearts, and rumour- 
mongers in Medina do not desist, We will certainly incite you "O Prophet’ 
against them, and then they will not be your neighbours there any longer. 
61. “They deserve to be’ condemned. "If they were to persist,’ they would 
get themselves seized and killed relentlessly wherever they are found!!823! 


62. That was Allah’s way with those ‘hypocrites’ who have gone before. 
And you will find no change in Allah’s way. 


When Is the Hour? 
63. People ask you "O Prophet" about the Hour. Say, “That knowledge is 
only with Allah. You never know, perhaps the Hour is near.” 


The Doomed 

64. Surely Allah condemns the disbelievers, and has prepared for them a 
blazing Fire, 65. to stay there for ever and ever—never will they find any 
protector or helper. 66. On the Day their faces are ‘constantly’ flipped in the 
Fire, they will cry, “Oh! If only we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the 
Messenger!” 67. And they will say, “Our Lord! We obeyed our leaders and 
elite, but they led us astray from the ‘Right’ Way. 68. Our Lord! Give them 
double ‘our’ punishment, and condemn them tremendously.” 


Advice to the Believers 
69. O believers! Do not be like those who slandered Moses, but Allah 
cleared him of what they said. And he was honourable in the sight of Allah. 
[8741 79, O believers! Be mindful of Allah, and say what is right. 71. He will 
bless your deeds for you, and forgive your sins. And whoever obeys Allah 
and His Messenger, has truly achieved a great triumph. 


The Truste] 

72. Indeed, We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the 
mountains, but they ‘all’ declined to bear it, being fearful of it. But 
humanity assumed it, "for’ they are truly wrongful ‘to themselves’ and 
ignorant "of the consequences’, 73. so that Allah will punish hypocrite men 
and women and polytheistic men and women, and Allah will turn in mercy 
to believing men and women. For Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 
[876] 


KK K 


34. Sheba 
(Saba’') 


This Meccan strah takes its name from the reference to the people of Sheba 
(verses 15-20) who were pymighed for meeting Ahah favours with 
ingratitude. Both David (.{z-{;) and Solomon (.{z-[;) are cited as 
grateful servants of Allah. We eccan pagans are rémtftded that only faith 
can bring them closersyof Allah, not their wealth. They are criticized for 
calling the Prophet ( .{z-[;) ‘insane’ and are warned of punishment in this 
life and the next. Drie e last part of this sûrah (verses 40-41) and the 
beginning of the next (verse 1) reaffirm the angels as Allah’s faithful 
servants. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Praises to the Almighty 
1. All praise is for Allah, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and 
whatever is on the earth. And praise be to Him in the Hereafter. He is the 
All-Wise, All-Aware. 2. He knows whatever goes into the earth and 
whatever comes out of it, and whatever descends from the sky and whatever 
ascends into it. And He is the Most Merciful, All-Forgiving. 


Denying the Hour 

3. The disbelievers say, “The Hour will never come to us.” Say, "O 
Prophet,’ “Yes—by my Lord, the Knower of the unseen—it will certainly 
come to you!” Not ‘even’ an atom’s weight is hidden from Him in the 
heavens or the earth; nor anything smaller or larger than that, but is 
“written” in a perfect Record.'8Z2! 4. So He may reward those who believe 
and do good. It is they who will have forgiveness and an honourable 
provision. 5. As for those who strive to discredit Our revelations, it is they 
who will suffer the "worst’ torment of agonizing pain. 6. Those gifted with 
knowledge ‘clearly’ see that what has been revealed to you from your Lord 
"O Prophet’ is the truth, and that it guides to the Path of the Almighty, the 
Praiseworthy. 


Warning to the Deniers 


7. The disbelievers say "mockingly to one another’, “Shall we show you a 
man who claims that when you have been utterly disintegrated you will be 
raised as a new creation? 8. Has he fabricated a lie against Allah or is he 
insane?” In fact, those who do not believe in the Hereafter are bound for 
torment and have strayed farthest ‘from the truth’. 9. Have they not then 
seen all that surrounds them of the heavens and the earth? If We willed, We 
could cause the earth to swallow them up, or cause ‘deadly’ pieces of the 
sky to fall upon them. Surely in this is a sign for every servant who turns "to 
Allah’. 


Allah’s Favours to David 
10. Indeed, We granted David a ‘great’ privilege from Us, ‘commanding:" 
“O mountains! Echo his hymns! And the birds as well.” We made iron 
mouldable for him, 11. instructing: “Make full-length armour, ‘perfectly’ 
balancing the links. And work righteousness "O family of David!". Indeed, I 
am All-Seeing of what you do.” 


Allah’s Favours to Solomon 

12. And to Solomon ‘We subjected" the wind: its morning stride was a 
month’s journey and so was its evening stride. And We caused a stream of 
molten copper to flow for him, and "We subjected" some of the jinn to work 
under him by his Lord’s Will. And whoever of them deviated from Our 
command, We made them taste the torment of the blaze. 13. They made for 
him whatever he desired of sanctuaries, statues,'222) basins as large as 
reservoirs, and cooking pots fixed ‘into the ground’. "We ordered:* “Work 
gratefully, O family of David!” "Only* a few of My servants are ‘truly’ 
grateful. 14. When We decreed Solomon’s death, nothing indicated to the 
subjected’ jinn that he was dead except the termites eating away his staff. 
[879] So when he collapsed, the jinn realized that if they had ‘really’ known 
the unseen, they would not have remained in ‘such’ humiliating servitude. 


Allah’s Favours to Sheba 1) Provision 
15. Indeed, there was a sign for ‘the tribe of’ Sheba in their homeland: two 
orchards—one to the right and the other to the left. "They were told: “Eat 
from the provision of your Lord, and be grateful to Him. "Yours is’ a good 
land and a forgiving Lord.” 16. But they turned away. So We sent against 
them a devastating flood, and replaced their orchards with two others 


producing bitter fruit, fruitless bushes,'8°2! and a few “sparse” thorny trees. 
(8811 17, This is how We rewarded them for their ingratitude. Would We 
ever punish ‘anyone in such a way’ except the ungrateful? 


Allah’s Favours to Sheba 2) Safe Travel 

18. We had also placed between them and the cities!882] We showered with 
blessings "many small’ towns within sight of one another. And We set 
moderate travel distances in between, ‘saying,’ “Travel between them by 
day and night safely.” 19. But they said, “Our Lord! Make ‘the distances of" 
our journeys longer,” wronging themselves.'883! So We reduced them to 
‘cautionary’ tales, and scattered them utterly. Surely in this are lessons for 
whoever is steadfast, grateful. 


Satan’s Vow Regarding Humans 
20. Indeed, Iblis’ assumption about them has come true,'®84! so they ‘all’ 
follow him, except a group of ‘true’ believers. 21. He does not have any 
authority over them, but ‘Our Will is’ only to distinguish those who believe 
in the Hereafter from those who are in doubt about it. And your Lord is a 
‘vigilant’ Keeper over all things.” 


Helpless Idols 

22. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Call upon those you claim ‘to be divine’ besides 
Allah. They do not possess “even’ an atom’s weight either in the heavens or 
the earth, nor do they have any share in ‘governing’ them. Nor is any of 
them a helper to Him.” 23. No intercession will be of any benefit with Him, 
except by those granted permission by Him. ‘At last,’ when the dread ‘of 
Judgment Day’ is relieved from their hearts "because they are permitted to 
intercede’, they will "excitedly’ ask ‘the angels’, “What has your Lord ‘just’ 
said?” The angels will reply, “The truth! And He is the Most High, All- 
Great.” 


Message to the Polytheists 
24. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Who provides for you from the heavens and 
the earth?” Say, “Allah! Now, certainly one of our two groups'8®8! is 
‘rightly’ guided; the other is clearly astray.” 25. Say, “You will not be 
accountable for our misdeeds, nor will we be accountable for your deeds.” 
26. Say, “Our Lord will gather us together, then He will judge between us 
with the truth. For He is the All-Knowing Judge.” 27. Say, “Show me those 


‘idols’ you have joined with Him as partners. No! In fact, He ‘alone’ is 
Allah—the Almighty, All-Wise.” 


Warning of the Hour 
28. We have sent you "O Prophet’ only as a deliverer of good news and a 
warner to all of humanity, but most people do not know. 29. And they ask 
‘the believers’, “When will this threat come to pass, if what you say is 
true?” 30. Say, "O Prophet,’ “A Day has ‘already’ been appointed for you, 
which you can neither delay nor advance by a ‘single’ moment.” 


The Misleaders and the Misled 

31. The disbelievers vow, “We will never believe in this Quran, nor in those 
"Scriptures" before it.” If only you could see when the wrongdoers will be 
detained before their Lord, throwing blame at each other! The lowly 
“followers’ will say to the arrogant ‘leaders’, “Had it not been for you, we 
would certainly have been believers.” 32. The arrogant will respond to the 
lowly, “Did we ever hinder you from guidance after it came to you? In fact, 
you were wicked ‘on your own’.” 33. The lowly will say to the arrogant, 
“No! It was your plotting by day and night—when you ordered us to 
disbelieve in Allah and to set up equals with Him.” They will ‘all’ hide 
‘their’ remorse when they see the torment. And We will put shackles around 
the necks of the disbelievers. Will they be rewarded except for what they 
used to do? 


Spoiled Elite 

34. Whenever We sent a warner to a society, its elite would say, “We truly 
reject what you have been sent with.” 35. Adding, “We are far superior "to 
the believers’ in wealth and children, and we will never be punished.” 36. 
Say, "O Prophet,’ “Surely ‘it is‘ my Lord 'Who’ gives abundant or limited 
provisions to whoever He wills. But most people do not know.” 37. It is not 
your wealth or children that bring you closer to Us. But those who believe 
and do good—it is they who will have a multiplied reward for what they 
did, and they will be secure in ‘elevated’ mansions. 38. As for those who 
strive to discredit Our revelations, it is they who will be confined in 
punishment. 39. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Surely ‘it is’ my Lord ‘Who’ gives 
abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills of His servants. And 
whatever you spend in charity, He will compensate ‘you’ for it. For He is 
the Best Provider.” 


The Worshippers and the Worshipped 

40. And ‘consider’ the Day He will gather them all together, and then ask 
the angels, “Was it you that these 'polytheists’ used to worship?” 41. They 
will say, “Glory be to You! Our loyalty is to You, not them. In fact, they 
only’ followed the ‘temptations of evil’ jinn,!886] in whom most of them 
had faith.” 42. So Today neither of you can benefit or protect each other. 
And We will say to the wrongdoers, “Taste the torment of the Fire, which 
you used to deny.” 


Response of the Polytheists 

43. When Our clear revelations are recited to them, they say, “This is only a 
man who wishes to hinder you from what your forefathers used to 
worship.” They also say, “This "Quran" is no more than a fabricated lie.” 
And the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them, “This is 
nothing but pure magic.” 44. "They say so even though’ We had never given 
them any scriptures to study, nor did We ever send them a warner before 
you "O Prophet’. 45. Those ‘destroyed’ before them denied as well—and 
these "Meccans’ have not attained even one-tenth of what We had given 
their predecessors.'882! Yet "when" they denied My messengers, how severe 
was My response! 


Advice to Meccan Pagans 
46. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I advise you to do ‘only’ one thing: stand up for ‘the 
sake of’ Allah—individually or in pairs—then reflect. Your fellow man|®8! 
is not insane. He is only a warner to you before ‘the coming of" a severe 
punishment.” 47. Say, “If I had ever asked you for a reward, you could keep 
it. My reward is only from Allah. And He is a Witness over all things.” 48. 
Say, “Surely my Lord hurls the truth ‘against falsehood’. "He is’ the Knower 
of all unseen.” 49. Say, “The truth has come, and falsehood will vanish, 
never to return.” 50. Say, “If I am astray, the loss is only mine. And if I am 
guided, it is ‘only’ because of what my Lord reveals to me. He is indeed 
All-Hearing, Ever Near.” 
Too Late for the Deniers 
51. If only you could see when they will be horrified with no escape ‘on 
Judgment Day”! And they will be seized from a nearby place.'889! 52. They 
will ‘then’ cry, “We do ‘now’ believe in it ‘all’.” But how could they 


“possibly” attain faith from a place so far-off "from the world’,'822! 53. while 
they had already rejected it before, guessing blindly from a place ‘equally’ 
far-away ‘from the Hereafter’? 54. They will be sealed off from whatever 
they desire, as was done to their counterparts before. Indeed, they were ‘all" 
in alarming doubt. 

kk 


35. The Originator 
(Fafir) 


This Meccan sûrah demonstrates Allah’s infinite power through the marvels 
of His creatigi, gin contrast with the powerlessness of the pagan idols. The 
Prophet ( -{z-/¢) is consoled by the fact that many prophets were denied 
before io believers are promised of a great reward in Paradise 
(verses 31-35), while the disbelievers are warned of a scathing punishment 
in Hell (verses 36-39). All these themes are echoed in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Power 1) Creation and Mercy 
1. All praise is for Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who 
made angels ‘as His’ messengers with wings—two, three, or four. He 
increases in creation whatever He wills. Surely Allah is Most Capable of 
everything. 2. Whatever mercy Allah opens up for people, none can 
withhold it. And whatever He withholds, none but Him can release it. For 
He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 


One God Only 
3. O humanity! Remember Allah’s favours upon you. Is there any creator 
other than Allah who provides for you from the heavens and the earth? 
There is no god ‘worthy of worship" except Him. How can you then be 
deluded ‘from the truth”? 


Reassuring the Prophet 
4. If you are rejected by them, so too were messengers before you. And to 
Allah ‘all” matters will be returned ‘for judgment’. 

Warning Against Satan 
5. O humanity! Indeed, Allah’s promise is true. So do not let the life of this 
world deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver'®24! deceive you about Allah. 
6. Surely Satan is an enemy to you, so take him as an enemy. He only 
invites his followers to become inmates of the Blaze. 


The Evildoers and the Good-Doers 


7. Those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment. But those who 
believe and do good will have forgiveness and a great reward. 8. Are those 
whose evil-doing is made so appealing to them that they deem it good ‘like 
those who are rightly guided"? It is’ certainly Allah "Who" leaves to stray 
whoever He wills, and guides whoever He wills. So do not grieve yourself 
to death over them "O Prophet’. Surely Allah is All-Knowing of what they 
do. 


Allah’s Power 2) The Wind 
9. And it is Allah Who sends the winds, which then stir up ‘vapour, 
forming’ clouds, and then We drive them to a lifeless land, giving life to the 
earth after its death. Similar is the Resurrection. 


All Honour and Power Belongs to Allah 
10. Whoever seeks honour and power, then ‘let them know that’ all honour 
and power belongs to Allah. To Him ‘alone’ good words ascend, and 
righteous deeds are raised up by Him. As for those who plot evil, they will 
suffer a severe punishment. And the plotting of such "people’ is doomed ‘to 
fail’. 
Allah’s Power 3) Creation of Humans 

11. And ‘it is’ Allah “Who” created you from dust,'822! then "developed you" 
from a sperm-drop, then made you into pairs.!'823! No female ever conceives 
or delivers without His knowledge. And no one’s life is made long or cut 
short but is “written” in a Record.'8°4! That is certainly easy for Allah. 


Allah’s Power 4) Fresh and Salt Water 
12. The two bodies of water are not alike: one is fresh, palatable, and 
pleasant to drink and the other is salty and bitter. Yet from them both you 
eat tender seafood and extract ornaments to wear. And you see the ships 
ploughing their way through both, so you may seek His bounty and give 
thanks ‘to Him’. 


Allah’s Power 5) Alternation of Day and Night 
13. He merges the night into the day and the day into the night, and has 
subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. That is 
Allah—your Lord! All authority belongs to Him. But those ‘idols’ you 
"pagans' invoke besides Him do not possess even the skin of a date stone. 
14. If you call upon them, they cannot hear your calls. And if they were to 


hear, they could not respond to you. On the Day of Judgment they will 
disown your worship ‘of them’. And no one can inform you "O Prophet’ like 
the All-Knowledgeable. 


Allah’s Power 6) Sustenance 
15. O humanity! It is you who stand in need of Allah, but Allah ‘alone’ is 
the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. 16. If He willed, He could eliminate you 
and produce a new creation. 17. And that is not difficult for Allah ‘at all’. 


Everyone Is Accountable for Themselves 
18. No soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another. And if a sin- 
burdened soul cries for help with its burden, none of it will be carried— 
even by a close relative. You "O Prophet’ can only warn those who stand in 
awe of their Lord without seeing Him!®25! and establish prayer. Whoever 
purifies themselves, they only do so for their own good. And to Allah is the 
final return. 


Guidance vs. Misguidance 
19. Those blind ‘to the truth’ and those who can see are not equal, 20. nor 
are the darkness and the light, 21. nor the ‘scorching’ heat and the ‘cool’ 
shade.!825! 22. Nor are the dead and the living equal. Indeed, Allah ‘alone’ 
makes whoever He wills hear, but you "O Prophet’ can never make those in 
the graves hear ‘your call’. 


Reassuring the Prophet 
23. You are only a warner. 24. We have surely sent you with the truth as a 
deliverer of good news and a warner. There is no community that has not 
had a warner.'822! 25. If they deny you, so did those before them. Their 
messengers came to them with clear proofs, divine Books, and enlightening 
Scriptures.'828! 26. Then I seized those who persisted in disbelief. How 
severe was My response! 


Allah’s Power 7) Diversity 
27. Do you not see that Allah sends down rain from the sky with which We 
bring forth fruits of different colours? And in the mountains are streaks of 
varying shades of white, red, and raven black; 28. just as people, living 
beings, and cattle are of various colours as well. Of all of Allah’s servants, 
only the knowledgeable ‘of His might’ are ‘truly’ in awe of Him. Allah is 
indeed Almighty, All-Forgiving. 


The Everlasting Reward 
29. Surely those who recite the Book of Allah, establish prayer, and donate 
from what We have provided for them—secretly and openly—' can’ hope 
for an exchange that will never fail, 30. so that He will reward them in full 
and increase them out of His grace. He is truly All-Forgiving, Most 
Appreciative. 


Three Types of Believers 
31. The Book We have revealed to you "O Prophet’ is the truth, confirming 
what came before it.'822! Surely Allah is All-Aware, All-Seeing of His 
servants. 32. Then We granted the Book to those We have chosen from Our 
servants. Some of them wrong themselves, some follow a middle course, 
and some are foremost in good deeds by Allah’s Will. That is ‘truly’ the 
greatest bounty. 


Reward of the Believers 
33. They will enter the Gardens of Eternity, where they will be adorned 
with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing will be silk. 34. And 
they will say, “Praise be to Allah, Who has kept away from us all ‘causes 
of’ sorrow. Our Lord is indeed All-Forgiving, Most Appreciative. 35. "He is 
the One’ Who—out of His grace—has settled us in the Home of Everlasting 
Stay, where we will be touched by neither fatigue nor weariness.” 


Punishment of the Disbelievers 

36. As for the disbelievers, they will have the Fire of Hell, where they will 
not be ‘allowed to be’ finished by death, nor will its torment be lightened 
for them. This is how We reward every ‘stubborn’ disbeliever. 37. There 
they will be ‘fervently’ screaming, “Our Lord! Take us out ‘and send us 
back". We will do good, unlike what we used to do.” "They will be told,’ 
“Did We not give you lives long enough so that whoever wanted to be 
mindful could have done so? And the warner came to you. So taste ‘the 
punishment’, for the wrongdoers have no helper.” 

Denying the Almighty 
38. Indeed, Allah is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. 
He surely knows best what is “hidden” in the heart. 39. He is the One Who 
has placed you as successors on earth. So whoever disbelieves will bear ‘the 
burden of" their own disbelief. The disbelievers’ denial only increases them 


in contempt in the sight of their Lord, and it will only contribute to their 
loss. 


Useless Idols 
40. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Have you considered your associate-gods 
which you invoke besides Allah? Show me what they have created on 
earth! Or do they have a share in "the creation of’ the heavens? Or have We 
given the polytheists a Book, which serves as a clear proof for them? In 
fact, the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusion.” 


Allah’s Power 8) Maintaining the Universe 
41. Indeed, Allah ‘alone’ keeps the heavens and the earth from falling apart. 
If they were to fall apart, none but Him could hold them up. He is truly 
Most Forbearing, All-Forgiving. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 

42. They swore by Allah their most solemn oaths that if a warner were to 
come to them, they would certainly be better guided than any other 
community. Yet when a warner did come to them, it only drove them farther 
away— 43. behaving arrogantly in the land and plotting evil. But evil 
plotting only backfires on those who plot. Are they awaiting anything but 
the fate of those ‘destroyed’ before? You will find no change in the way of 
Allah, nor will you find it diverted "to someone else’. 44. Have they not 
travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those ‘destroyed’ 
before them? They were far superior in might. But there is nothing that can 
escape Allah in the heavens or the earth. He is certainly All-Knowing, Most 
Capable. 


Allowing Time for Repentance 
45. If Allah were to punish people ‘immediately’ for what they have 
committed, He would not have left a single living being on earth. But He 
delays them for an appointed term. And when their time arrives, then surely 
Allah is All-Seeing of His servants. 
oe ke ke 


36. Ya-Sin 
(Ya-Sin) 


This Meccan sûrah emphasizes the divine nature and purpose of the Quran. 
The Arab pagans are reminded of the fate of earlier disbelievers and 
condemned for following Satan, denying she Resurrection, discrediting the 
Quran, and rejecting the Prophet ( .{z-/;) as ‘a poet.’ Similar to the next 
sûrah, some examples of Allah’s wéndérs of creation are cited to prove His 
ability to bring the dead back to life. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Wake-up Call 
1. Ya-Sin. 2. By the Quran, rich in wisdom! 3. You "O Prophet’ are truly one 
of the messengers 4. upon the Straight Path. 5. "This is* a revelation from 
the Almighty, Most Merciful, 6. so that you may warn a people whose 
forefathers were not warned, and so are heedless. 7. The decree ‘of torment’ 
has already been justified against most of them, for they will never believe. 
8. ‘It is as if’ We have put shackles around their necks up to their chins, so 
their heads are forced up, 9. and have placed a barrier before them and a 
barrier behind them and covered them ‘all’ up, so they fail to see ‘the truth’. 


Who Benefits from Reminders 
10. It is the same whether you warn them or not—they will never believe. 
11. You can only warn those who follow the Reminder2! and are in awe 
of the Most Compassionate without seeing Him.'224! So give them good 
news of forgiveness and an honourable reward. 12. It is certainly We Who 
resurrect the dead, and write what they send forth and what they leave 
behind. Everything is listed by Us in a perfect Record.!22! 


The Three Messengers 
13. Give them an example "O Prophet’ of the residents of a town, when the 
messengers came to them. 14. We sent them two messengers, but they 
rejected both. So We reinforced ‘the two’ with a third, and they declared, 
“We have indeed been sent to you ‘as messengers’.” 15. The people replied, 
“You are only humans like us, and the Most Compassionate has not 


revealed anything. You are simply lying!” 16. The messengers responded, 
“Our Lord knows that we have truly been sent to you. 17. And our duty is 
only to deliver ‘the message’ clearly.” 18. The people replied, “We 
definitely see you as a bad omen for us. If you do not desist, we will 
certainly stone you ‘to death’ and you will be touched with a painful 
punishment from us.” 19. The messengers said, “Your bad omen lies within 
yourselves. Are you saying this because you are reminded ‘of the truth”? In 
fact, you are a transgressing people.” 


An Advocate of the Truth 

20. Then from the farthest end of the city a man came, rushing. He advised, 
“O my people! Follow the messengers. 21. Follow those who ask no reward 
of you, and are ‘rightly’ guided. 22. And why should I not worship the One 
Who has originated me, and to Whom you will be returned. 23. How could 
I take besides Him other gods whose intercession would not be of any 
benefit to me, nor could they save me if the Most Compassionate intended 
to harm me? 24. Indeed, I would then be clearly astray. 25. I do believe in 
your Lord, so listen to me.” 26. "But they killed him, then’ he was told "by 
the angels’, “Enter Paradise!” He said, “If only my people knew 27. of how 
my Lord has forgiven me, and made me one of the honourable.” 


The Wicked Destroyed 
28. We did not send any soldiers from the heavens against his people after 
his death, nor did We need to. 29. All it took was one ‘mighty’ blast, and 
they were extinguished at once. 30. Oh pity, such beings! No messenger 
ever came to them without being mocked. 31. Have the deniers not 
considered how many peoples We destroyed before them who never came 
back to life again? 32. Yet they will all be brought before Us. 


Allah’s Signs 1) the Earth 
33. There is a sign for them in the dead earth: We give it life, producing 
grain from it for them to eat. 34. And We have placed in it gardens of palm 
trees and grapevines, and caused springs to gush forth in it, 35. so that they 
may eat from its fruit, which they had no hand in making. Will they not 
then give thanks? 36. Glory be to the One Who created all ‘things in’ pairs 
—be it’ what the earth produces, their genders, or what they do not know! 


Allah’s Signs 2) Night 


37. There is also a sign for them in the night: We strip from it daylight, then 
—behold!—they are in darkness. 


Allah’s Signs 3) the Sun and the Moon 
38. The sun travels for its fixed term. That is the design of the Almighty, 
All-Knowing. 39. As for the moon, We have ordained ‘precise’ phases for 
it, until it ends up like an old, curved palm stalk. 40. It is not for the sun to 
catch up with the moon,!?®! nor does the night outrun the day. Each is 
travelling in an orbit of their own. 


Allah’s Signs 4) Mercy at Sea 
41. Another sign for them is that We carried their ancestors ‘with Noah’ in 
the fully loaded Ark, 42. and created for them similar things to ride in. 43. 
If We willed, We could drown them: then no one would respond to their 
cries, nor would they be rescued— 44. except by mercy from Us, allowing 
them enjoyment for a ‘little’ while. 


Stance of the Polytheists 

45. "Still they turn away’ when it is said to them, “Beware of what is ahead 
of you ‘in the Hereafter’ and what is behind you ‘of destroyed nations’ so 
you may be shown mercy.” 46. Whenever a sign comes to them from their 
Lord, they turn away from it. 47. And when it is said to them, “Donate from 
what Allah has provided for you,” the disbelievers say to the believers, 
“Why should we feed those whom Allah could have fed if He wanted to? 
You are clearly astray!” 


Too Late for the Deniers 

48. And they ask ‘the believers’, “When will this threat come to pass, if 
what you say is true?” 49. They must be awaiting a single Blast,'2%4! which 
will seize them while they are ‘entrenched’ in ‘worldly’ disputes. 50. Then 
they will not be able to make a ‘last’ will, nor can they return to their own 
people. 51. The Trumpet will be blown ‘a second time’, then—behold!— 
they will rush from the graves to their Lord. 52. They will cry, “Woe to us! 
Who has raised us up from our place of rest? This must be what the Most 
Compassionate warned us of; the messengers told the truth!” 53. It will only 
take one Blast, then at once they will all be brought before Us. 54. On that 
Day no soul will be wronged in the least, nor will you be rewarded except 
for what you used to do. 


Reward of the Believers 
55. Indeed, on that Day the residents of Paradise will be busy enjoying 
themselves. 56. They and their spouses will be in ‘cool’ shade, reclining on 
“canopied’ couches. 57. There they will have fruits and whatever they 
desire. 58. And “Peace!” will be ‘their’ greeting from the Merciful Lord. 


Reward of the Disbelievers 

59. “Then the disbelievers will be told,’ “Step away ‘from the believers’ this 
Day, O wicked ones! 60. Did I not command you, O Children of Adam, not 
to follow Satan, for he is truly your sworn enemy, 61. but to worship Me 
“alone”? This is the Straight Path. 62. Yet he already misled great multitudes 
of you. Did you not have any sense? 63. This is the Hell you were warned 
of. 64. Burn in it Today for your disbelief.” 65. On this Day We will seal 
their mouths, their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will testify to what 
they used to commit. 


Allah’s Power over the Deniers 
66. Had We willed, We could have easily blinded their eyes, so they would 
struggle to find their way. How then could they see? 67. And had We 
willed, We could have transfigured them on the spot,'282! so they could 
neither progress forward nor turn back. 68. And whoever We grant a long 
life, We reverse them in development.'2! Will they not then understand? 


The Prophet Is Not a Poet 
69. We have not taught him poetry, nor is it fitting for him. This "Book" is 
only a Reminder and a clear Quran 70. to warn whoever is ‘truly’ alive and 
fulfil the decree ‘of torment’ against the disbelievers. 


Allah’s Signs 5) Domesticated Animals 
71. Do they not see that We singlehandedly! created for them, among 
other things, cattle which are under their control? 72. And We have 
subjected these ‘animals’ to them, so they may ride some and eat others. 73. 
And they derive from them other benefits and drinks. Will they not then 
give thanks? 


Ingratitude of the Deniers 
74. Still they have taken other gods besides Allah, hoping to be helped "by 
them’. 75. They cannot help the pagans, even though they serve the idols as 


dedicated guards.'%8! 76. So do not let their words grieve you "O Prophet’. 
Indeed, We ‘fully’ know what they conceal and what they reveal. 


Allah’s Power to Resurrect 
77. Do people not see that We have created them from a sperm-drop, then— 
behold!—they openly challenge ‘Us’? 78. And they argue with Us— 
forgetting they were created—saying, “Who will give life to decayed 
bones?” 79. Say, "O Prophet,’ “They will be revived by the One Who 
produced them the first time, for He has ‘perfect’ knowledge of every 
created being. 80. "He is the One’ Who gives you fire from green trees, and 
—behold!—you kindle ‘fire’ from them.'222! 81. Can the One Who created 
the heavens and the earth not ‘easily’ resurrect these ‘deniers'?” Yes "He 
can"! For He is the Master Creator, All-Knowing. 82. All it takes, when He 
wills something ‘to be’, is simply to say to it: “Be!” And it is! 83. So glory 
be to the One in Whose Hands is the authority over all things, and to Whom 
‘alone’ you will ‘all’ be returned. 
kkk 


37. Those ‘Angels’ Lined up in Ranks 
(A$ Saffat) 


For the most part, this Meccan sarah explains verse 31 from the previous 
sûrah: “Have the deniers not considered how many peoples We destroyed 
before them ...2”. Hence, several examples of destroyed disbelievers are 
cited here, including the peoples of Noah, Lot, and Elias. Some basic truths 
are emphasized, including the angipss of Allah, the Resurrection, and the 
prophethood of Mulgammad aie The pagans are criticized for calling 
the Prophet (.- A ‘a ma t’ and for claiming that the angels are 
Allah’s daughter? This stirah provides more details on the punishment of 
the disbelievers and the reward of the beligygrs in the Hereafter (verses 19- 
68). In conclusion, the Prophet (. +) is reassured that Allah’s 
messengers always prevail. 4% 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


One God Only 
1. By those ‘angels’ lined up in ranks, 2. and those who diligently drive ‘the 
clouds’, 3. and those who recite the Reminder! 4. Surely your God is One! 
5. "He is’ the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, 
and the Lord of all points of sunrise. 


The Heavens Decorated and Protected 
6. Indeed, We have adorned the lowest heaven with the stars for decoration 
7. and ‘for’ protection from every rebellious devil. 8. They cannot listen to 
the highest assembly ‘of angels’ for they are pelted from every side, 9. 
‘fiercely’ driven away. And they will suffer an everlasting torment. 10. But 
whoever manages to stealthily eavesdrop is ‘instantly’ pursued by a piercing 
flare. 
A Question to Resurrection Deniers 

11. So ask them "O Prophet’, which is harder to create: them or other 
marvels of Our creation?!2!2! Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay. 
[911] 42, In fact, you are astonished "by their denial", while they ridicule 


F E 


you’. 13. When they are reminded, they are never mindful. 14. And 


whenever they see a sign, they make fun of it, 15. saying, “This is nothing 
but pure magic. 16. When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will 
we really be resurrected? 17. And our forefathers as well?” 18. Say, “Yes! 
And you will be fully humbled.” 


The Deniers After Resurrection 

19. It will only take one Blast,'242! then at once they will see ‘it all’. 20. 
They will cry, “Oh, woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment!” 21. "They will 
be told,’ “This is the Day of ‘Final’ Decision which you used to deny.” 22. 
"Allah will say to the angels,’ “Gather ‘all’ the wrongdoers along with their 
peers, and whatever they used to worship 23. instead of Allah, then lead 
them ‘all’ to the path of Hell. 24. And detain them, for they must be 
questioned.” 25. "Then they will be asked,’ “What is the matter with you 
that you can no longer help each other?” 26. In fact, on that Day they will 
be ‘fully’ submissive. 


The Misleaders vs. the Misled 

27. They will turn on each other, throwing blame. 28. The misled will say, 
“It was you who deluded us away from what is right.”!2/3! 29. The 
misleaders will reply, “No! You disbelieved on your own. 30. We had no 
authority over you. In fact, you yourselves were a transgressing people. 31. 
The decree of our Lord has come to pass against us ‘all’: we will certainly 
taste ‘the punishment’. 32. We caused you to deviate, for we ourselves were 
deviant.” 33. Surely on that Day they will ‘all’ share in the punishment. 


Warning to Arab Pagans 
34. That is certainly how We deal with the wicked. 35. For whenever it was 
said to them ‘in the world’, “There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except 
Allah,” they acted arrogantly 36. and argued, “Should we really abandon 
our gods for a mad poet?” 37. In fact, he came with the truth, confirming 
"earlier’ messengers. 38. You will certainly taste the painful torment, 39. 
and will only be rewarded for what you used to do. 


Reward of the Devout 
40. But not the chosen servants of Allah. 41. They will have a known 
provision: 42. fruits "of every type’.!2/4! And they will be honoured 43. in 
the Gardens of Bliss, 44. facing each other on thrones.!245] 45. A drink ‘of 
pure wine’ will be passed around to them from a flowing stream: 46. 


crystal-white, delicious to drink. 47. It will neither harm ‘them’, nor will 
they be intoxicated by it. 48. And with them will be maidens of modest 
gaze and gorgeous eyes, 49. as if they were pristine pearls.!2!©! 


The People of Paradise Chatting 

50. Then they will turn to one another inquisitively.'22! 51. One of them 
will say, “I once had a companion ‘in the world’ 52. who used to ask ‘me’, 
‘Do you actually believe ‘in resurrection’? 53. When we are dead and 
reduced to dust and bones, will we really be brought to judgment?’” 54. He 
will ‘then’ ask, “Would you care to see ‘his fate’?” 55. Then he ‘and the 
others’ will look and spot him in the midst of the Hellfire. 56. He will ‘then’ 
say, “By Allah! You nearly ruined me. 57. Had it not been for the grace of 
my Lord, I ‘too’ would have certainly been among those brought "to Hell’.” 
58. ‘Then he will ask his fellow believers,’ “Can you imagine that we will 
never die, 59. except our first death, nor be punished ‘like the others’?” 60. 
This is truly the ultimate triumph. 61. For such ‘honour’ all should strive. 


Hospitality for the People of Hell 
62. Is this "bliss" a better accommodation or the tree of Zaqqûm?!%8] 63. We 
have surely made it a test for the wrongdoers. 64. Indeed, it is a tree that 
grows in the depths of Hell, 65. bearing fruit like devils’ heads. 66. The 
evildoers will certainly "be left to` eat from it, filling up their bellies with it. 
67. Then on top of that they will be given a blend of boiling drink. 68. Then 
they will ultimately return to "their place in’ Hell. 


Blind Following 
69. Indeed, they found their forefathers astray, 70. so they rushed in their 
footsteps! 71. And surely most of the earlier generations had strayed before 
them, 72. although We had certainly sent warners among them. 73. See then 
what was the end of those who had been warned. 74. But not the chosen 
servants of Allah. 


Prophet Noah 
75. Indeed, Noah cried out to Us, and how excellent are We in responding! 
76. We delivered him and his family!2!2! from the great distress, 77. and 
made his descendants the sole survivors.'229! 78. And We blessed him ‘with 
honourable mention’ among later generations: 79. “Peace be upon Noah 
among all peoples.” 80. Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers. 81. 


For’ he was truly one of Our faithful servants. 82. Then We drowned the 
others. 


Prophet Abraham 

83. And indeed, one of those who followed his way was Abraham. 84. 
“Remember' when he came to his Lord with a pure heart, 85. and said to his 
father and his people, “What are you worshipping? 86. Is it false gods that 
you desire instead of Allah? 87. What then do you expect from the Lord of 
all worlds?” 88. He later looked up to the stars "in contemplation’,'224! 89. 
then said, “I am really sick.”!222! 90. So they turned their backs on him and 
went away. 91. Then he ‘stealthily’ advanced towards their gods, and said 
"mockingly’, “Will you not eat "your offerings’? 92. What is wrong with 
you that you cannot speak?” 93. Then he swiftly turned on them, striking 
‘them’ with his right hand. 94. Later, his people came rushing towards him 
‘furiously’. 95. He argued, “How can you worship what you carve ‘with 
your own hands’, 96. when it is Allah Who created you and whatever you 
do?” 97. They said "to one another’, “Build him a furnace and cast him into 
the blazing fire.” 98. And so they sought to harm him, but We made them 
inferior. 


Abraham, Ishmael and the Sacrifice 
99. He later said, “I am leaving ‘in obedience’ to my Lord. He will guide 
me. 100. My Lord! Bless me with righteous offspring.” 101. So We gave 
him good news of a forbearing son. 102. Then when the boy reached the 
age to work with him, Abraham said, “O my dear son! I have seen in a 
dream that I ‘must’ sacrifice you. So tell me what you think.” He replied, 
“O my dear father! Do as you are commanded. Allah willing, you will find 
me steadfast.” 103. Then when they submitted ‘to Allah’s Will’, and 
Abraham laid him on the side of his forehead ‘for sacrifice’, 104. We called 
out to him, “O Abraham! 105. You have already fulfilled the vision.” 
Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers. 106. That was truly a 
revealing test. 107. And We ransomed his son with a great sacrifice,!222! 
108. and blessed Abraham ‘with honourable mention’ among later 
generations: 109. “Peace be upon Abraham.” 110. This is how We reward 
the good-doers. 111. He was truly one of Our faithful servants. 112. We 
‘later’ gave him good news of Isaac—a prophet, and one of the righteous. 


[924] 413, We blessed him!222! and Isaac as well. Some of their descendants 
did good, while others clearly wronged themselves. 


Prophet Moses and Prophet Aaron 

114. And We certainly showed favour to Moses and Aaron, 115. and 
delivered them and their people from the great distress. 116. We helped 
them so it was they who prevailed. 117. We gave them the clear Scripture, 
118. and guided them to the Straight Path. 119. And We blessed them ‘with 
honourable mention’ among later generations: 120. “Peace be upon Moses 
and Aaron.” 121. Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers. 122. They 
were truly ‘two’ of Our faithful servants. 


Prophet Elias 
123. And Elias was indeed one of the messengers. 124. Remember’ when 
he said to his people, “Will you not fear "Allah"? 125. Do you call upon "the 
idol of’ Ba’l and abandon the Best of Creators— 126. Allah, your Lord and 
the Lord of your forefathers?” 127. But they rejected him, so they will 
certainly be brought "for punishment’. 128. But not the chosen servants of 
Allah. 129. We blessed him ‘with honourable mention’ among later 
generations: 130. “Peace be upon Elias.” 131. Indeed, this is how We 
reward the good-doers. 132. He was truly one of Our faithful servants. 
Prophet Lot 
133. And Lot was indeed one of the messengers. 134. ‘Remember’ when 
We delivered him and all of his family, 135. except an old woman, !?®! who 
was one of the doomed. 136. Then We ‘utterly’ destroyed the rest. 137. You 
"Meccans’ certainly pass by their ruins day 138. and night. Will you not 
then understand? 
Prophet Jonah 

139. And Jonah was indeed one of the messengers. 140. Remember’ when 
he fled to the overloaded ship. 141. Then ‘to save it from sinking,’ he drew 
straws ‘with other passengers’. He lost ‘and was thrown overboard’. 142. 
Then the whale engulfed him while he was blameworthy.!222! 143. Had he 
not ‘constantly’ glorified ‘Allah’,'228! 144. he would have certainly 
remained in its belly until the Day of Resurrection.'222! 145. But We cast 
him onto the open ‘shore’, ‘totally’ worn out, 146. and caused a squash plant 
to grow over him.!222! 147. We ‘later’ sent him “back” to ‘his city of" at least 


one hundred thousand people, 148. who then believed ‘in him’, so We 
allowed them enjoyment for a while. 


Questions to Arab Pagans 

149. Ask them "O Prophet’ if your Lord has daughters,'22"! while the pagans 
"prefer to` have sons. 150. Or ‘ask them’ if We created the angels as females 
right before their eyes. 151. Indeed, it is one of their ‘outrageous’ 
fabrications to say, 152. “Allah has children.” They are simply liars. 153. 
Has He chosen daughters over sons?!232! 154. What is the matter with you? 
How do you judge? 155. Will you not then be mindful? 156. Or do you 
have ‘any’ compelling proof? 157. Then bring ‘us’ your scripture, if what 
you say is true! 158. They have also established a ‘marital’ relationship 
between Him and the jinn. Yet the jinn ‘themselves’ know well that such 
people will certainly be brought ‘for punishment’.!222! 159. Glorified is 
Allah far above what they claim! 160. But not the chosen servants of Allah. 
161. Surely you ‘pagans’ and whatever “idols* you worship 162. can never 
lure “anyone’ away from Him 163. except those “destined” to burn in Hell. 


Angels’ Response 
164. "The angels respond,’ “There is not one of us without an assigned 
station ‘of worship’. 165. We are indeed the ones lined up in ranks ‘for 
Allah’. 166. And we are indeed the ones ‘constantly’ glorifying "His 
praise’.” 
The Pagans Before the Quran 

167. They certainly used to say, 168. “If only we had a Reminder like "those 
of’ earlier peoples,!234 169. we would have truly been Allah’s devoted 
servants.” 170. But ‘now’ they reject it, so they will soon know. 


Reassuring the Prophet 

171. Our Word has already gone forth to Our servants, the messengers, 172. 
that they would surely be helped, 173. and that Our forces will certainly 
prevail. 174. So turn away from the deniers for a while "O Prophet’. 175. 
You will see “what will happen to` them, and they too will see! 176. Do they 
‘really’ wish to hasten Our punishment? 177. Yet when it descends upon 
them:!235] how evil will that morning be for those who had been warned! 
178. And turn away from them for a while. 179. You will see, and they too 
will see! 


The Conclusion 
180. Glorified is your Lord—the Lord of Honour and Power—above what 
they claim! 181. Peace be upon the messengers. 182. And praise be to Allah 
—Lord of all worlds. 
kkk 


38. Sad 
(ad) 


This sarah is perceived as a continuation of the previous sûrah since it 
mentions some prophets that are not mentioned there—such as David, 
Solomon, and Job. Again, the pagans are, cpademned for denying the 
oneness of Allah, rejecting the Prophet ( -(z-[;) as ‘a magician, a total 
liar,’ and for claiming that the ort ay ofeated without purpose. 
Reference is made to the creation of Adam ( .{z-{;) and the enmity Satan 
has for him and his descendants (verses A 5), and the punishment 
awaiting the misleaders and their followers (verses 55-64), contrasted with 
the bliss in store for the righteous (verses 49-54). The end of this sûrah 
emphasizes the universality of the Quran whereas the beginning of the next 
speaks of its divine nature. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Arab Deniers 
1. Sad. By the Quran, full of reminders! 2. "This is the truth,’ yet the 
disbelievers are ‘entrenched’ in arrogance and opposition. 3. "Imagine’ how 
many peoples We destroyed before them, and they cried out when it was too 
late to escape. 4. Now, the pagans are astonished that a warner has come to 
them from among themselves.!236! And the disbelievers say, “This is a 
magician, a total liar! 5. Has he reduced ‘all’ the gods to One God? Indeed, 
this is something totally astonishing.” 

Chief Deniers 
6. The chiefs among them went forth saying, “Carry on, and stand firm in 
devotion to your gods. Certainly this is just a scheme "for power’.!222! 7. We 
have never heard of this in the previous faith.'288! This is nothing but a 
fabrication. 8. Has the Reminder been revealed ‘only’ to him out of ‘all of" 
us?” In fact, they are “only” in doubt of My "revealed" Reminder.'222! In fact, 
‘they do so because’ they have not yet tasted My punishment. 9. Or ‘is it 
because’ they possess the treasuries of the mercy of your Lord—the 
Almighty, the Giver ‘of all bounties’. 10. Or ‘is it because’ the kingdom of 


the heavens and the earth and everything in between belongs to them? Let 
them then climb their way ‘to heaven, if their claim is true’. 


Warning to the Deniers 

11. This is just another "enemy" force bound for defeat out there.'24°! 12, 
Before them, the people of Noah denied ‘the truth’, as did ’Ad, Pharaoh of 
the mighty structures, 244] 13. Thamiid, the people of Lot, and the residents 
of the Forest.'242! These were ‘all’ enemy forces. 14. Each rejected their 
messenger, so My punishment was justified. 15. These "pagans" are 
awaiting nothing but a single Blast that cannot be stopped. 16. They say 
"mockingly’, “Our Lord! Hasten for us our share ‘of the punishment’ before 
the Day of Reckoning.” 


Prophet David 
17. Be patient "O Prophet’ with what they say. And remember Our servant, 
David, the man of strength. Indeed, he ‘constantly’ turned ‘to Allah’. 18. We 
truly subjected the mountains to hymn ‘Our praises’ along with him in the 
evening and after sunrise. 19. And "We subjected’ the birds, flocking 
together. All turned to him “echoing his hymns’. 20. We strengthened his 
kingship, and gave him wisdom and sound judgment. 


David and the Disputing Partners 
21. Has the story of the two plaintiffs, who scaled the ‘wall of David’s’ 
sanctuary, reached you "O Prophet"? 22. When they came into David’s 
presence, he was startled by them. They said, “Have no fear. "We are 
merely’ two in a dispute: one of us has wronged the other. So judge between 
us with truth—do not go beyond ‘it'—and guide us to the right way. 23. 
This is my brother.'%42! He has ninety-nine sheep while I have ‘only’ one. 
Still’ he asked me to give it up to him, overwhelming me with ‘his’ 
argument.” 24. David ‘eventually’ ruled, “He has definitely wronged you in 
demanding ‘to add’ your sheep to his. And certainly many partners wrong 
each other, except those who believe and do good—but how few are they!” 
Then David realized that We had tested him so he asked for his Lord’s 


forgiveness, fell down in prostration, and turned "to Him in repentance’.!! 


25. So We forgave that for him. And he will indeed have ‘a status of" 
closeness to Us and an honourable destination! 26. "We instructed him:* “O 
David! We have surely made you an authority in the land, so judge between 


people with truth. And do not follow ‘your’ desires or they will lead you 
astray from Allah’s Way. Surely those who go astray from Allah’s Way will 
suffer a severe punishment for neglecting the Day of Reckoning.” 


Allah Is Just 
27. We have not created the heavens and earth and everything in between 
without purpose—as the disbelievers think. So woe to the disbelievers 
because of the Fire! 28. Or should We treat those who believe and do good 
like those who make mischief throughout the land? Or should We treat the 
righteous like the wicked? 


The Purpose of the Quran 
29. "This is’ a blessed Book which We have revealed to you "O Prophet’ so 
that they may contemplate its verses, and people of reason may be mindful. 


Solomon’s Love for Fine Horses 
30. And We blessed David with Solomon—what an excellent servant "he 
was'! Indeed, he ‘constantly’ turned ‘to Allah’. 31. "Remember" when the 
well-trained, swift horses were paraded before him in the evening. 32. He 
then proclaimed, “I am truly in love with ‘these’ fine things out of 
remembrance for Allah,” until they went out of sight. 33. "He ordered,’ 


“Bring them back to me!” Then he began to rub down their legs and necks. 
[945] 


Solomon’s Authority 

34. And indeed, We tested Solomon, placing a ‘deformed’ body on his 
throne,!246! then he turned ‘to Allah in repentance’. 35. He prayed, “My 
Lord! Forgive me, and grant me an authority that will never be matched by 
anyone after me. You are indeed the Giver ‘of all bounties’.” 36. So We 
subjected to him the wind, blowing gently at his command to wherever he 
pleased. 37. And "We subjected to him’ every builder and diver!%42! of the 
jinn, 38. and others bound together in chains. 39. ‘Allah said,’ “This is Our 
gift, so give or withhold "as you wish’, never to be called to account.” 40. 
And he will indeed have ‘a status of’ closeness to Us and an honourable 
destination! 


Prophet Job 
41. And remember Our servant Job, when he cried out to his Lord, “Satan 
has afflicted me with distress and suffering.” 42. "We responded,’ “Stomp 


your foot: ‘now’ here is a cool ‘and refreshing’ spring for washing and 
drinking.” 43. And We gave him back his family, twice as many, as a mercy 
from Us and a lesson for people of reason. 44. "And We said to him,’ “Take 
in your hand a bundle of grass, and strike "your wife’ with it, and do not 
break your oath.”!248] We truly found him patient. What an excellent servant 
"he was‘! Indeed, he ‘constantly’ turned "to Allah’. 


Other Mighty Prophets 
45. And remember Our servants: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—the men of 
strength and insight. 46. We truly chose them for the honour of proclaiming 
the Hereafter. 47. And in Our sight they are truly among the chosen and the 
finest. 48. Also remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Zul-Kifl.!242! All are among 
the best. 


Reward of the Righteous 
49. This is ‘all’ a reminder. And the righteous will certainly have an 
honourable destination: 50. the Gardens of Eternity, whose gates will be 
open for them. 51. There they will recline, calling for abundant fruit and 
drink. 52. And with them will be maidens of modest gaze and equal age. 53. 
This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning. 54. This is indeed 
Our provision that will never end. 


Reward of the Wicked 
55. That is that. And the transgressors will certainly have the worst 
destination: 56. Hell, where they will burn. What an evil place to rest! 57. 
Let them then taste this: boiling water and ‘oozing’ pus, 58. and other 
torments of the same sort! 


Disputes of the Wicked 

59. "The misleaders will say to one another,’ “Here is a crowd ‘of followers’ 
being thrown in with us. They are not welcome, ‘for’ they ‘too’ will burn in 
the Fire.”!259] 60. The followers will respond, “No! You are not welcome! 
You brought this upon us. What an evil place for settlement!” 61. Adding, 
“Our Lord! Whoever brought this upon us, double their punishment in the 
Fire.” 62. The tyrants will ask ‘one another’, “But why do we not see those 
we considered to be lowly? 63. Were we wrong in mocking them ‘in the 
world’?!254! Or do our eyes “just” fail to see them “in the Fire’?” 64. This 
dispute between the residents of the Fire will certainly come to pass. 


The Messenger and His Message 

65. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I am only a warner. And there is no god ‘worthy of 
worship’ except Allah—the One, the Supreme. 66. "He is the’ Lord of the 
heavens and the earth and everything in between—the Almighty, Most 
Forgiving.” 67. Say, “This Quran" is momentous news, 68. from which you 
‘pagans’ are turning away.” 69. "And say,’ “I had no knowledge of the 
highest assembly "in heaven" when they differed “concerning Adam’.!252! 
70. What is revealed to me is that I am only sent with a clear warning.” 


Satan’s Arrogance 
71. "Remember, O Prophet’ when your Lord said to the angels, “I am going 
to create a human being from clay. 72. So when I have fashioned him and 
had a spirit of My Own ‘creation’ breathed into him, fall down in 
prostration to him.” 73. So the angels prostrated all together— 74. but not 
Iblis,'223! who acted arrogantly,'2°4! becoming unfaithful. 75. Allah asked, 
“O Iblis! What prevented you from prostrating to what I created with My 
Own Hands? Did you ‘just’ become proud? Or have you always been 
arrogant?” 76. He replied, “I am better than he is: You created me from fire 
and him from clay.” 77. Allah commanded, “Then get out of Paradise, for 
you are truly cursed. 78. And surely upon you is My condemnation until the 
Day of Judgment.” 79. Satan appealed, “My Lord! Then delay my end until 
the Day of their resurrection.” 80. Allah said, “You will be delayed 81. until 
the appointed Day.” 82. Satan said, “By Your Glory! I will certainly mislead 
them all, 83. except Your chosen servants among them.” 84. Allah 
concluded, “The truth is—and I ‘only’ say the truth—: 85. I will surely fill 
up Hell with you and whoever follows you from among them, all together.” 


Message to the Deniers 
86. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I do not ask you for any reward for this ‘Quran’, nor 
do I pretend to be someone I am not. 87. It is only a reminder to the whole 
world. 88. And you will certainly know its truth before long.” 
kkk 


39. The ‘Successive’ Groups 
(Az-Zumar) 


This Meccan sûrah builds on the story of the creation of Adam in the 
previous sirah by referring to the creation of Adam’s spouse, and how their 
descendants were created in the womb, developing in successive stages. 
Some of those descendants choose to be faithful and grateful to their 
Creator, while others choose not to. Eventually, following a fair judgment, 
the former will be led to their places in Paradise and the latter to their 
places in Hell—each in successive groups (hence the stirah’s name). Allah’s 
willingness to forgive sins is highly emphasized in the last part of this sûrah 
and the beginning of the next. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Worship Allah Alone 

1. The revelation of this Book is from Allah—the Almighty, All-Wise. 2. 
Indeed, We have sent down the Book to you "O Prophet’ in truth, so 
worship Allah ‘alone’, being sincerely devoted to Him. 3. Indeed, sincere 
devotion is due ‘only’ to Allah. As for those who take other lords besides 
Him, ‘saying,’ “We worship them only so they may bring us closer to 
Allah,” surely Allah will judge between all!233] regarding what they differed 
about. Allah certainly does not guide whoever persists in lying and 
disbelief. 


Allah’s Power of Creation 
4. Had it been Allah’s Will to have offspring, He could have chosen 
whatever He willed of His creation. Glory be to Him! He is Allah—the 
One, the Supreme. 5. He created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. 
He wraps the night around the day, and wraps the day around the night. And 
He has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. 
He is truly the Almighty, Most Forgiving. 6. He created you ‘all’ from a 
single soul,!5! then from it He made its mate.'252! And He produced for 
you four pairs of cattle.'258! He creates you in the wombs of your mothers 
"in stages", one development after another, in three layers of darkness.!2°9! 


That is Allah—your Lord! All authority belongs to Him. There is no god 
“worthy of worship’ except Him. How can you then be turned away? 


Belief and Disbelief 
7. If you disbelieve, then ‘know that’ Allah is truly not in need of you, nor 
does He approve of disbelief from His servants. But if you become grateful 
‘through faith’, He will appreciate that from you. No soul burdened with sin 
will bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He 
will inform you of what you used to do. He certainly knows best what is 
hidden’ in the heart. 


Disbelievers’ Ingratitude 

8. When one is touched with hardship, they cry out to their Lord, turning to 
Him ‘alone’. But as soon as He showers them with blessings from Him, 
they ‘totally’ forget the One they had cried to earlier, and set up equals to 
Allah to mislead ‘others’ from His Way. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Enjoy your 
disbelief for a little while! You will certainly be one of the inmates of the 
Fire.” 9. ‘Are they better’ or those who worship ‘their Lord’ devoutly in the 
hours of the night, prostrating and standing, fearing the Hereafter and 
hoping for the mercy of their Lord? Say, "O Prophet,’ “Are those who know 
equal to those who do not know?” None will be mindful ‘of this’ except 
people of reason. 


Orders to the Prophet 

10. Say "O Prophet, that Allah says’, “O My servants who believe! Be 
mindful of your Lord. Those who do good in this world will have a good 
reward. And Allah’s earth is spacious. Only those who endure patiently will 
be given their reward without limit.” 11. Say, “I am commanded to worship 
Allah, being sincerely devoted to Him ‘alone’. 12. And I am commanded to 
be the first of those who submit ‘to His Will’.” 13. Say, “I truly fear—if I 
were to disobey my Lord—the torment of a tremendous Day.” 14. Say, “It is 
‘only’ Allah that I worship, being sincere in my devotion to Him. 15. 
Worship then whatever ‘gods’ you want instead of Him.” Say, “The ‘true’ 
losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on Judgment 
Day. That is indeed the clearest loss.” 16. They will have layers of fire 
above and below them. That is what Allah warns His servants with. So fear 
Me, O My servants! 


The Faithful and the Unfaithful 

17. And those who shun the worship of false gods, turning to Allah ‘alone’, 
will have good news. So give good news to My servants "O Prophet'— 18. 
those who listen to what is said and follow the best of it.'262! These are the 
ones ‘rightly’ guided by Allah, and these are ‘truly’ the people of reason. 19. 
What about those against whom the decree of torment has been justified? Is 
it you "O Prophet’ who will then save those bound for the Fire? 20. But 
those mindful of their Lord will have ‘elevated’ mansions, built one above 
the other, under which rivers flow. "That is’ the promise of Allah. ‘And’ 
Allah never fails in “His” promise. 


Parable for This Fleeting Life 
21. Do you not see that Allah sends down rain from the sky—channelling it 
through streams in the earth—then produces with it crops of various 
colours, then they dry up and you see them wither, and then He reduces 
them to chaff? Surely in this is a reminder for people of reason. 


The Believers and the Disbelievers 
22. Can "the misguided be like’ those whose hearts Allah has opened to 
Islam, so they are enlightened by their Lord? So woe to those whose hearts 
are hardened at the remembrance of Allah! It is they who are clearly astray. 


Excellence of the Quran 

23. "It is’ Allah "Who’ has sent down the best message—a Book of perfect 
consistency and repeated lessons—which causes the skin ‘and hearts’ of 
those who fear their Lord to tremble, then their skin and hearts soften at the 
mention of "the mercy of’ Allah. That is the guidance of Allah, through 
which He guides whoever He wills. But whoever Allah leaves to stray will 
be left with no guide. 24. Are those who will only have their ‘bare’ faces to 
shield themselves from the awful torment on Judgment Day ‘better than 
those in Paradise’? It will ‘then’ be said to the wrongdoers: “Reap what you 
sowed!” 


Rejection Leads to Punishment 
25. Those before them ‘also’ rejected ‘the truth’, then the torment came 
upon them from where they least expected. 26. So Allah made them taste 
humiliation in this worldly life, but far worse is the punishment of the 
Hereafter, if only they knew. 


Perfection of the Quran 
27. We have certainly set forth every ‘kind of’ lesson for people in this 
Quran, so perhaps they will be mindful. 28. ‘It is’ a Quran ‘revealed’ in 
Arabic without any crookedness, so perhaps they will be conscious ‘of 
Allah’. 


Parable for a Polytheist and a Monotheist 
29. Allah sets forth the parable of a slave owned by several quarrelsome 
masters, and a slave owned by only one master. Are they equal in 
condition?!2&! Praise be to Allah! In fact, most of them do not know. 


All Will Die 
30. You "O Prophet’ will certainly die, and they will die too. 31. Then on 
the Day of Judgment you will ‘all settle your’ dispute before your Lord. 


Reward of the Believers and Disbelievers 
32. Who then does more wrong than those who lie about Allah and reject 
the truth after it has reached them? Is Hell not a ‘fitting’ home for the 
disbelievers? 33. And the one who has brought the truth and those who 
embrace it—it is they who are the righteous. 34. They will have whatever 
they desire with their Lord. That is the reward of the good-doers. 35. As 
such, Allah will absolve them of ‘even’ the worst of what they did and 
reward them according to the best of what they used to do. 


Allah Protects His Messenger 
36. Is Allah not sufficient for His servant? Yet they threaten you with other 
"powerless' gods besides Him! Whoever Allah leaves to stray will be left 
with no guide. 37. And whoever Allah guides, none can lead astray. Is Allah 
not Almighty, capable of punishment? 


Almighty Allah or Powerless Gods 
38. If you ask them "O Prophet’ who created the heavens and the earth, they 
will certainly say, “Allah!” Ask ‘them’, “Consider then whatever ‘idols’ you 
invoke besides Allah: if it was Allah’s Will to harm me, could they undo 
that harm? Or if He willed "some" mercy for me, could they withhold His 
mercy?” Say, “Allah is sufficient for me. In Him ‘alone’ the faithful put 
their trust.” 


Warning to the Pagans 


39. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O my people! Persist in your ways, for I ‘too’ will 
persist in mine. You will soon come to know 40. who will be visited by a 
humiliating torment ‘in this life’ and overwhelmed by an everlasting 


TI 


punishment ‘in the next’. 


Free Choice 
41. Surely We have revealed to you the Book "O Prophet’ with the truth for 
humanity. So whoever chooses to be guided, it is for their own good. And 
whoever chooses to stray, it is only to their own loss. You are not a keeper 
over them. 


Sleep: The Twin Brother of Death 
42. "It is’ Allah Who’ calls back the souls ‘of people’ upon their death as 
well as ‘the souls’ of the living during their sleep. Then He keeps those for 
whom He has ordained death, and releases the others until ‘their’ appointed 
time. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect. 


Allah or the Idols 
43. Or have they taken others besides Allah as intercessors? Say, "O 
Prophet,’ “Would they do so,’ even though those ‘idols’ have neither 
authority nor intelligence?” 44. Say, “All intercession belongs to Allah 
‘alone’. To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Then to 
Him you will ‘all’ be returned.” 45. Yet when Allah alone is mentioned, the 
hearts of those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are filled with disgust. But 
as soon as those ‘gods’ other than Him are mentioned, they are filled with 
joy. 

Allah Is the Judge 
46. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O Allah—Originator of the heavens and the earth, 
Knower of the seen and unseen! You will judge between Your servants 
regarding their differences.” 47. Even if the wrongdoers were to possess 
everything in the world twice over, they would certainly offer it to ransom 
themselves from the horrible punishment on Judgment Day, for they will 
see from Allah what they had never expected. 48. And the evil 
“consequences' of their deeds will unfold before them, and they will be 
overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule. 


Human Ingratitude 


49. When one is touched with hardship, they cry out to Us ‘alone’. Then 
when We shower Our blessings upon them, they say, “I have been granted 
all this only because of "my` knowledge.” Not at all! It is "no more than’ a 
test. But most of them do not know. 50. The same had already been said by 
those “destroyed” before them,'2°2! but their “worldly” gains were of no 
benefit to them. 51. So the evil ‘consequences’ of their deeds overtook 
them. And the wrongdoers among these ‘pagans’ will be overtaken by the 
evil ‘consequences’ of their deeds. And they will have no escape. 52. Do 
they not know that Allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever 
He wills? Surely in this are signs for people who believe. 


Allah Forgives All Sins 

53. Say, "O Prophet, that Allah says,’ “O My servants who have exceeded 
the limits against their souls! Do not lose hope in Allah’s mercy, for Allah 
certainly forgives all sins.'953! He is indeed the All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 54. Turn to your Lord ‘in repentance’, and ‘fully’ submit to Him 
before the punishment reaches you, ‘for’ then you will not be helped. 55. 
Follow ‘the Quran,’ the best of what has been revealed to you from your 
Lord, before the punishment takes you by surprise while you are unaware, 
56. so that no ‘sinful’ soul will say "on Judgment Day’, ‘Woe to me for 
neglecting "my duties towards’ Allah, while ridiculing ‘the truth’.’ 57. Or "a 
soul will’ say, ‘If only Allah had guided me, I would have certainly been 
one of the righteous.’ 58. Or say, upon seeing the torment, ‘If only I had a 
second chance, I would have been one of the good-doers.’ 59. Not at all! 
My revelations had already come to you, but you rejected them, acted 
arrogantly, and were one of the disbelievers.” 


Judgment Day 
60. On the Day of Judgment you will see those who lied about Allah with 
their faces gloomy. Is Hell not a ‘fitting’ home for the arrogant? 61. And 
Allah will deliver those who were mindful ‘of Him’ to their place of 
‘ultimate’ triumph. No evil will touch them, nor will they grieve. 62. Allah 
is the Creator of all things, and He is the Maintainer of everything. 63. To 
Him belong the keys ‘of the treasuries’ of the heavens and the earth. As for 
those who rejected the signs of Allah, it is they who will be the true’ losers. 


One God Alone 


64. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Are you urging me to worship ‘anyone’ other than 
Allah, O ignorant ones?” 65. It has already been revealed to you—and to 
those ‘prophets’ before you—that if you associate others ‘with Allah’, your 
deeds will certainly be void and you will truly be one of the losers. 66. 
Rather, worship Allah ‘alone’ and be one of the grateful. 


Beginning of the End 
67. They have not shown Allah His proper reverence—when on the Day of 
Judgment the "whole’ earth will be in His Grip, and the heavens will be 
rolled up in His Right Hand. Glorified and Exalted is He above what they 
associate "with Him"! 68. The Trumpet will be blown and all those in the 
heavens and all those on the earth will fall dead, except those Allah wills ‘to 
spare’. Then it will be blown again and they will rise up at once, looking on 
"in anticipation’. 
Divine Justice 

69. The earth!24! will shine with the light of its Lord, the record ‘of deeds’ 
will be laid ‘open’, the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward 
—and judgment will be passed on all with fairness. None will be wronged. 
70. Every soul will be paid in full for its deeds, for Allah knows best what 
they have done. 


Reward of the Wicked 

71. Those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in successive’ groups. 
When they arrive there, its gates will be opened and its keepers will ask 
them: “Did messengers not come to you from among yourselves, reciting to 
you the revelations of your Lord and warning you of the coming of this Day 
of yours?” The disbelievers will cry, “Yes "indeed"! But the decree of 
torment has come to pass against the disbelievers.” 72. It will be said to 
them, “Enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever.” What an evil home for 
the arrogant! 


Reward of the Righteous 
73. And those who were mindful of their Lord will be led to Paradise in 
“successive’ groups. When they arrive at its ‘already’ open gates, its keepers 
will say, “Peace be upon you! You have done well, so come in, to stay 
forever.” 74. The righteous will say, “Praise be to Allah Who has fulfilled 


His promise to us, and made us inherit the “everlasting” land!2©! to settle in 


Paradise wherever we please.” How excellent is the reward of those who 
work ‘righteousness! 


Praising Allah’s Grace and Justice 
75. You will see the angels all around the Throne, glorifying the praises of 
their Lord, for judgment will have been passed on all with fairness. And it 
will be said,'86! “Praise be to Allah—Lord of all worlds!” 
kkk 


40. The Forgiver 
(Ghadfir) 


In essence, this Meccan sûrah emphasizes the main concepts highlighted 
both in the previous and following sirahs—namely Allah being infinite in 
mercy and severe in punishment, and humanity being either grateful or 
ungrateful to their Lord along with the reward that ensues. All this is 
embodied in the story of Moses (verses 23-54)—with Pharaoh as the 
ungrateful disbeliever and an unidentifigd gran from Pharaoh’s people as 
the grateful believer. The Prophet (.{z-[;) is repeatedly advised to be 
patient, keeping in mind that Allah nt ets His prophets down (verses 51 
and 77). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Quran Is from the Almighty 
1. Ha-Mim. 2. The revelation of this Book is from Allah—the Almighty, 
All-Knowing, 3. the Forgiver of sin and Accepter of repentance, the Severe 
in punishment, and Infinite in bounty. There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ 
except Him. To Him ‘alone’ is the final return. 


Warning to the Disbelievers 

4. None disputes the signs of Allah except the disbelievers, so do not be 
deceived by their prosperity throughout the land. 5. Before them, the people 
of Noah denied ‘the truth’, as did ‘other’ enemy forces afterwards. Every 
community plotted against its prophet to seize him, and argued in 
falsehood, ‘hoping’ to discredit the truth with it. So I seized them. And how 
‘horrible’ was My punishment! 6. And so your Lord’s decree has been 
proven true against the disbelievers—that they will be the inmates of the 
Fire. 


Angels Pray for the Believers 
7. Those ‘angels’ who carry the Throne and those around it glorify the 
praises of their Lord, have faith in Him, and seek forgiveness for the 
believers, ‘praying:'’ “Our Lord! You encompass everything in ‘Your’ mercy 
and knowledge. So forgive those who repent and follow Your Way, and 


protect them from the torment of the Hellfire. 8. Our Lord! Admit them into 
the Gardens of Eternity which You have promised them, along with the 
righteous among their parents, spouses, and descendants. You ‘alone’ are 
truly the Almighty, All-Wise. 9. And protect them from "the consequences 
of their’ evil deeds. For whoever You protect from the evil of their deeds on 
that Day will have been shown Your mercy. That is ‘truly’ the ultimate 
triumph.” 


The Inmates of Hell 

10. Indeed, it will be announced to the disbelievers, “Allah’s contempt for 
you—as you disbelieved when invited to belief—was far worse than your 
contempt for one another "Today’.” 11. They will plead, “Our Lord! You 
made us lifeless twice, and gave us life twice.[287] Now we confess our sins. 
So is there any way out?” 12. "They will be told,’ “No! This is because 
when Allah alone was invoked, you ‘staunchly’ disbelieved. But when 
others were associated with Him ‘in worship’, you ‘readily’ believed. So 
“Today judgment belongs to Allah "alone —the Most High, All-Great.” 


Allah’s Might in Both Worlds 

13. He is the One Who shows you His signs and sends down ‘rain as’ a 
provision for you from the sky. ‘But’ none will be mindful except those who 
turn "to Him’. 14. So call upon Allah with sincere devotion, even to the 
dismay of the disbelievers. 15. "He is' Highly Exalted in rank, Lord of the 
Throne. He sends down the revelation by His command to whoever He 
wills of His servants to warn ‘all’ of the Day of Meeting— 16. the Day all 
will appear "before Allah’. Nothing about them will be hidden from Him. 
"He will ask,’ “Who does all authority belong to this Day? To Allah—the 
One, the Supreme!!268! 17. Today every soul will be rewarded for what it 
has done. No injustice Today! Surely Allah is swift in reckoning.” 


Horrors of Judgment Day 
18. Warn them "O Prophet’ of the approaching Day when the hearts will 
jump into the throats, suppressing distress. The wrongdoers will have 
neither a close friend nor intercessor to be heard. 19. Allah ‘even’ knows the 
sly glances of the eyes and whatever the hearts conceal. 20. And Allah 
judges with the truth, while those ‘idols’ they invoke besides Him cannot 
judge at all. Indeed, Allah alone’ is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 


Fate of the Deniers 

21. Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of 
those ‘destroyed’ before them? They were far superior in might and ‘richer 
in’ monuments throughout the land. But Allah seized them for their sins, 
and they had no protector from Allah. 22. That was because their 
messengers used to come to them with clear proofs, but they persisted in 
disbelief. So Allah seized them. Surely He is All-Powerful, severe in 
punishment. 


Moses Denied in Egypt 

23. Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs and compelling proof 24. to 
Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah. But they responded: “Magician! Total liar!” 
25. Then, when he came to them with the truth from Us, they said, “Kill the 
sons of those who believe with him and keep their women.” But the plotting 
of the disbelievers was only in vain. 26. And Pharaoh said, “Let me kill 
Moses, and let him call upon his Lord! I truly fear that he may change your 
traditions or cause mischief in the land.” 27. Moses replied, “I seek refuge 
in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant person who does not believe 
in the Day of Reckoning.” 


The Believer’s Advice: 1) Do Not Persecute for Belief 

28. A believing man from Pharaoh’s people, who was hiding his faith, 
argued, “Will you kill a man'®2! "only" for saying: ‘My Lord is Allah,’ 
while he has in fact come to you with clear proofs from your Lord? If he is 
a liar, it will be to his own loss. But if he is truthful, then you will be 
afflicted with some of what he is threatening you with. Surely Allah does 
not guide whoever is a transgressor, a total liar. 29. O my people! Authority 
belongs to you today, reigning supreme in the land. But who would help us 
against the torment of Allah, if it were to befall us?” Pharaoh assured ‘his 
people’, “I am telling you only what I believe, and I am leading you only to 
the way of guidance.” 


Advice 2) Learn from History 
30. And the man who believed cautioned, “O my people! I truly fear for 
you the doom of ‘earlier’ enemy forces— 31. like the fate of the people of 
Noah, ’Ad, Thamiid, and those after them. For Allah would never will to 
wrong ‘His’ servants. 32. O my people! I truly fear for you the Day all will 
be crying out ‘to each other'— 33. the Day you will ‘try in vain to’ turn 


your backs and run away, with no one to protect you from Allah. And 
whoever Allah leaves to stray will be left with no guide. 34. Joseph already 
came to you!2°! earlier with clear proofs, yet you never ceased to doubt 
what he came to you with. When he died you said, ‘Allah will never send a 
messenger after him.’ This is how Allah leaves every transgressor and 
doubter to stray— 35. those who dispute Allah’s signs with no proof given 
to them. How despicable is that for Allah and the believers! This is how 
Allah seals the heart of every arrogant tyrant.” 


Pharaoh’s Response 
36. Pharaoh ordered, “O Haman! Build me a high tower so I may reach the 
pathways 37. leading up to the heavens and look for the God of Moses, 
although I am sure he is a liar.”!2%] And so Pharaoh’s evil deeds were made 
so appealing to him that he was hindered from the ‘Right’ Way. But the 
plotting of Pharaoh was only in vain. 


Advice 3) Mend Your Ways 

38. And the man who believed urged, “O my people! Follow me, ‘and’ I 
will lead you to the Way of Guidance. 39. O my people! This worldly life is 
only ‘a fleeting’ enjoyment, whereas the Hereafter is truly the home of 
settlement. 40. Whoever does an evil deed will only be paid back with its 
equivalent. And whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a 
believer, they will enter Paradise, where they will be provided for without 
limit. 41. O my people! How is it that I invite you to salvation, while you 
invite me to the Fire! 42. You invite me to disbelieve in Allah and associate 
with Him what I have no knowledge of, while I invite you to the Almighty, 
Most Forgiving. 43. There is no doubt that whatever ‘idols’ you invite me to 
“worship’ are not worthy to be invoked either in this world or the Hereafter. 
[972] "Undoubtedly, our return is to Allah, and the transgressors will be the 
inmates of the Fire. 44. You will remember what I say to you, and I entrust 
my affairs to Allah. Surely Allah is All-Seeing of all "His" servants.” 


Allah’s Response 
45. So Allah protected him from the evil of their schemes. And Pharaoh’s 
people were overwhelmed by an evil punishment: 46. they are exposed to 
the Fire "in their graves’ morning and evening. And on the Day the Hour 


will be established ‘it will be said’, “Admit Pharaoh’s people into the 
harshest punishment ‘of Hell’.” 


Disputes Among Hell’s Inmates 
47. ‘Consider the Day’ when they will dispute in the Fire, and the lowly 
followers’ will appeal to the arrogant "leaders’, “We were your "dedicated" 
followers, will you then shield us from a portion of the Fire?” 48. The 
arrogant will say, “We are all in it! "For’ Allah has already passed judgment 
over ‘His’ servants.” 


Appeals from Hell 
49. And those in the Fire will cry out to the keepers of Hell,'222! “Pray to 
your Lord to lighten the torment for us ‘even’ for one day!” 50. The keepers 
will reply, “Did your messengers not ‘constantly’ come to you with clear 
proofs?” They will say, “Yes ‘they did’.” The keepers will say, “Then pray! 
Though the prayer of the disbelievers is only in vain.” 


Allah’s Help for the Believers 
51. We certainly help Our messengers and the believers, "both" in this 
worldly life and on the Day the witnesses will stand forth ‘for testimony — 
52. the Day the wrongdoers’ excuses will be of no benefit to them. They 
will be condemned, and will have the worst outcome. 274! 


Reassuring the Prophet 

53. And indeed, We gave Moses ‘true’ guidance, and made the Children of 
Israel inherit the Scripture— 54. a guide and a reminder to people of reason. 
55. So be patient "O Prophet’, ‘for’ Allah’s promise is certainly true. Seek 
forgiveness for your shortcomings.'225! And glorify the praises of your Lord 
morning and evening. 56. Surely those who dispute Allah’s signs—with no 
proof given to them—have nothing in their hearts but greed for dominance, 
which they will never attain. So seek refuge in Allah. Indeed, He alone is 
the All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 


Greater Creation 
57. The creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the re- 
creation of humankind, but most people do not know. 


Parable of Belief and Disbelief 
58. Those blind ‘to the truth’ and those who can see are not equal, nor are 
those who believe and do good ‘equal* to those who do evil. Yet you are 


hardly mindful. 59. The Hour is certainly coming, there is no doubt about it. 
But most people do not believe. 


Allah Answers Prayers 
60. Your Lord has proclaimed, “Call upon Me, I will respond to you. Surely 
those who are too proud to worship Me will enter Hell, fully humbled.” 


Allah Is Merciful to His Creation 
61. It is Allah Who has made the night for you to rest in and the day bright. 
Surely Allah is ever Bountiful to humanity, but most people are ungrateful. 
62. That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things. There is no god 
“worthy of worship’ except Him. How can you then be deluded "from the 
truth"? 63. This is how those who used to reject Allah’s signs were ‘also’ 
deluded. 


Allah Provides for All 
64. It is Allah Who made the earth a place of settlement for you and the sky 
a canopy. He shaped you ‘in the womb’, perfecting your form. And He has 
provided you with what is good and lawful. That is Allah—your Lord. So 
Blessed is Allah, Lord of all worlds. 65. He is the Ever-Living. There is no 
god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him. So call upon Him with sincere 
devotion, "saying,’ “All praise is for Allah—Lord of all worlds.” 


Allah Has Power over Life and Death 

66. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I have been forbidden to worship those ‘idols’ you 
worship besides Allah, since clear proofs have come to me from my Lord. 
And I have been commanded to ‘fully’ submit to the Lord of all worlds.” 
67. He is the One Who created youl?! from dust, then from a sperm-drop, 
[977] then "developed you into” a clinging clot "of blood’,!28! then He brings 
you forth as infants, so that you may reach your prime, and become old— 
though some of you ‘may’ die sooner—reaching an appointed time, so 
perhaps you may understand ‘Allah’s power’. 68. He is the One Who gives 
life and causes death. When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” 
And it is! 


Punishment of the Deniers 
69. Have you not seen how those who dispute Allah’s signs are turned 
away? 70. ‘They are’ the ones who reject this Book and all ‘scriptures’ We 
sent Our messengers with. So they will know ‘the consequences’ 71. when 


shackles will be around their necks and chains ‘on their legs’. They will be 
dragged 72. through boiling water, then burned in the Fire ‘as fuel’. 73. 
Then they will be asked, “Where are those ‘idols’ you used to associate 74. 
with Allah?” They will cry, “They have “all” failed us. In fact, we did not 
invoke anything ‘real’ before.” This is how Allah leaves the disbelievers to 
stray. 75. "They will be told,’ “This ‘punishment’ is for being prideful on 
earth unjustly and for acting arrogantly. 76. Enter the gates of Hell, to stay 
there forever. What an evil home for the arrogant!” 


Advice to the Prophet 

77. So be patient "O Prophet’. Surely Allah’s promise is true. Whether We 
show you some of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die ‘before 
that’, to Us they will ‘all’ be returned. 78. We already sent messengers 
before you. We have told you the stories of some of them, while others We 
have not. It was not for any messenger to bring a sign without Allah’s 
permission. But when Allah’s decree comes, judgment will be passed with 
fairness, and the people of falsehood will then be in ‘total loss. 


Some of Allah’s Favours 
79. It is Allah Who made cattle for you so that you may ride some and eat 
others. 80. Also, you find in them ‘other’ benefits.!222! And by means of 
them you may reach destinations you desire. And you are carried upon 
‘some of’ them and upon ships. 81. And He shows you His signs. Now 
which of Allah’s signs will you deny? 


More Warning to the Deniers 

82. Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of 
those who were ‘destroyed’ before them? They were far superior in might 
and ‘richer in’ monuments throughout the land, but their “worldly’ gains 
were of no benefit to them. 83. When their messengers came to them with 
clear proofs, they were prideful in whatever ‘worldly’ knowledge they had, 
[980] and were ‘ultimately’ overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule. 84. 
When they saw Our punishment, they cried, ““Now’' we believe in Allah 
alone and reject what we had been associating with Him!” 85. But their 
faith was of no benefit to them when they saw Our torment. This has 
‘always’ been Allah’s way ‘of dealing’ with His "wicked" servants. Then 
and there the disbelievers were in ‘total’ loss. 


KKK 


41. 'Verses' Perfectly Explained 
(FuSsilat) 


This Meccan surah, which takes its name from the description of the Quran 
in verse 3, rebukes the pagans for turning away from the truth; abusing the 
Quran; and for denying Allah, the sole Creator of the heavens and the 
earth. The deniers are warned that their own bodily organs will testify 
against them on Judgment Day, landing them in Hell forever. Reference to 
the destruction of the arrogant, ungrateful peoples of ’Ad and Thamiad is 
made because the pagan Arabs used to pass by their ruins on their journeys 
to Syria and Yemen, respectively. A profound description of the righteous is 
given in verses 30-36. The truth of the Quran is emphasized at the end of 
this surah and the beginning of the next. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Deniers of the Truth 

1. Ha-Mim. 2. "This is’ a revelation from the Most Compassionate, Most 
Merciful. 3. "It is‘ a Book whose verses are perfectly explained—a Quran in 
Arabic for people who know, 4. delivering good news and warning. Yet 
most of them turn away, so they do not hear. 5. They say, “Our hearts are 
veiled against what you are calling us to, there is deafness in our ears, and 
there is a barrier between us and you. So do ‘whatever you want’ and so 
shall we!” 


A Message to the Deniers 
6. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I am only a man like you, ‘but’ it has been revealed to 
me that your God is only One God. So take the Straight Way towards Him, 
and seek His forgiveness. And woe to the polytheists— 7. those who do not 
pay alms-tax and are in denial of the Hereafter. 8. “But’ those who believe 
and do good will certainly have a never-ending reward. 


A Question to the Deniers 
9. Ask "them, O Prophet’, “How can you disbelieve in the One Who created 
the earth in two Days? And how can you set up equals with Him? That is 
the Lord of all worlds. 10. He placed on the earth firm mountains, standing 


high, showered His blessings upon it, and ordained ‘all’ its means of 
sustenance—totaling four Days exactly!84!—for all who ask. 11. Then He 
turned towards the heaven when it was ‘still like’ smoke, saying to it and to 
the earth, ‘Submit, willingly or unwillingly.” They both responded, ‘We 
submit willingly.’ 12. So He formed the heaven into seven heavens in two 
Days, assigning to each its mandate. And We adorned the lowest heaven 
with ‘stars like’ lamps ‘for beauty’ and for protection. That is the design of 
the Almighty, All-Knowing.”!282! 


The Fate of ’Ad and Thamiid 

13. If they turn away, then say, "O Prophet,’ “I warn you of a ‘mighty’ blast, 
like the one that befell "Ad and Thamiid.” 14. The messengers had come to 
them from all angles, ‘proclaiming,’ “Worship none but Allah.” They 
responded, “Had our Lord willed, He could have easily sent down angels 
"instead". So we totally reject what you have been sent with.” 15. As for 
’Ad, they acted arrogantly throughout the land with no right, boasting, 
“Who is superior to us in might?” Did they not see that Allah "Himself", 
Who created them, was far superior to them in might? Still they persisted in 
denying Our signs. 16. So We sent against them a furious wind,!283] for 
several’ miserable days, to make them taste a humiliating punishment in 
this worldly life. But far more humiliating will be the punishment of the 
Hereafter. And they will not be helped. 17. As for Thamtid, We showed 
them guidance, but they preferred blindness over guidance. So the blast of a 
disgracing punishment overtook them for what they used to commit. 18. 
And We delivered those who were faithful and were mindful ‘of Allah’. 


Testimony of Organs 
19. ‘Consider’ the Day ‘when’ the enemies of Allah will be gathered for the 
Fire, all driven in ranks. 20. When they reach it, their ears, eyes, and skin 
will testify against what they used to do.!284 21. They will ask their skin 
‘furiously’, “Why have you testified against us?” It will say, “We have been 
made to speak by Allah, Who causes all things to speak. He ‘is the One 
Who’ created you the first time, and to Him you were bound to return. 22. 
You did not "bother to’ hide yourselves from your ears, eyes, and skin to 
prevent them from testifying against you. Rather, you assumed that Allah 
did not know much of what you used to do. 23. It was that ‘false’ 
assumption you entertained about your Lord that has brought about your 


doom, so you have become losers.” 24. Even if they endure patiently, the 
Fire will ‘always’ be their home. And if they "beg to’ appease ‘their Lord’, 
they will never be allowed to. 


What Caused That Fate 

25. We placed at their disposal ‘evil’ associates who made their past and 
future "misdeeds’ appealing to them.'282! "So" the fate of earlier 
communities of jinn and humans has been justified against them ‘as well’, 
‘for’ they were truly losers. 26. The disbelievers advised "one another’, “Do 
not listen to this Quran but drown it out so that you may prevail.” 27. So We 
will certainly make the disbelievers taste a severe punishment, and We will 
surely repay them according to the worst of their deeds. 28. That is the 
reward of Allah’s enemies: the Fire, which will be their eternal home—a 
‘fitting’ reward for their denial of Our revelations. 29. The disbelievers will 
‘then’ cry, “Our Lord! Show us those jinn and humans who led us astray: 
we will put them under our feet so that they will be among the lowest “in 
Hell’.” 


Reward of the Devout 

30. Surely those who say, “Our Lord is Allah,” and then remain steadfast, 
the angels descend upon them,!%85! "saying," “Do not fear, nor grieve. 
Rather, rejoice in the good news of Paradise, which you have been 
promised. 31. We are your supporters in this worldly life and in the 
Hereafter. There you will have whatever your souls desire, and there you 
will have whatever you ask for: 32. an accommodation from the All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful ‘Lord’.” 


Qualities of True Believers 

33. And whose words are better than someone who calls ‘others’ to Allah, 
does good, and says, “I am truly one of those who submit.”?'282! 34, Good 
and evil cannot be equal. Respond ‘to evil’ with what is best, then the one 
you are in a feud with will be like a close friend. 35. But this cannot be 
attained except by those who are patient and who are truly fortunate. 36. 
And if you are tempted by Satan, then seek refuge with Allah. Indeed, He 
“alone’ is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 


Worship the Creator, Marvel at Creation 


37. Among His signs are the day and the night, the sun and the moon. Do 
not prostrate to the sun or the moon, but prostrate to Allah, Who created 
them ‘all’, if you ‘truly’ worship Him ‘alone’. 38. But if the pagans are too 
proud, then ‘let them know that’ those ‘angels’ nearest to your Lord glorify 
Him day and night, and never grow weary. 39. And among His signs is that 
you see the earth devoid of life, but as soon as We send down rain upon it, it 
begins to stir ‘to life’ and swell. Indeed, the One Who revives it can easily 
revive the dead. He is certainly Most Capable of everything. 


Warning to the Quran Deniers 

40. Indeed, those who abuse Our revelations'282! are not hidden from Us. 
Who is better: the one who will be cast into the Fire or the one who will be 
secure on Judgment Day? Do whatever you want. He is certainly All- 
Seeing of what you do. 41. Indeed, those who deny the Reminder"?! after 
it has come to them ‘are doomed’, for it is truly a mighty Book. 42. It 
cannot be proven false from any angle. "It is' a revelation from the "One 
Who is’ All-Wise, Praiseworthy. 43. "O Prophet!" Nothing is said to you "by 
the deniers’ except what was already said to the messengers before you. 
Surely your Lord is ‘the Lord’ of forgiveness and painful punishment. 


Response to Demanding Non-Arabic Quran 
44. Had We revealed it as a non-Arabic Quran, they would have certainly 
argued, “If only its verses were made clear "in our language’. What! A non- 
Arabic revelation for an Arab audience!” Say, "O Prophet,’ “It is a guide 
and a healing to the believers. As for those who disbelieve, there is deafness 
in their ears and blindness to it "in their hearts’. It is as if they are being 
called from a faraway place.”!2%2! 
Moses Was Denied Too 
45. Indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture, but differences arose 
regarding it. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord," their 
differences would have been settled ‘at once’. They are truly in alarming 
doubt about it. 
The Good and the Wicked 
46. Whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. And whoever does evil, it 
is to their own loss. Your Lord is never unjust to "His’ creation. 


Allah’s Infinite Knowledge 


47. With Him ‘alone’ is the knowledge of the Hour. No fruit comes out of 
its husk, nor does a female conceive or deliver without His knowledge. And 
‘consider’ the Day He will call to those ‘pagans’, “Where are My ‘so-called’ 
associate-gods?” They will cry, “We declare before you that none of us 
testifies to that ‘any longer’.” 48. Whatever ‘idols’ they used to invoke 
besides Allah will fail them. And they will realize that they will have no 
escape. 


Ingratitude of the Deniers 

49. One never tires of praying for good. And if touched with evil, they 
become desperate and hopeless. 50. And if We let them taste a mercy from 
Us after being touched with adversity, they will certainly say, “This is what 
I deserve. I do not think the Hour will ‘ever’ come. And if in fact I am 
returned to my Lord, the finest reward with Him will definitely be mine.” 
But We will surely inform the disbelievers of what they used to do. And We 
will certainly make them taste a harsh torment. 51. When We show favour 
to someone, they turn away, acting arrogantly. And when touched with evil, 
they make endless prayers "for good’. 


Denying Allah’s Revelation 
52. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Imagine if this ‘Quran’ is ‘truly’ from Allah 
and you deny it: who can be more astray than those who have gone too far 
in opposition "to the truth"?” 


Creation Testifies to the Truth 
53. We will show them Our signs in the universe and within themselves 
until it becomes clear to them that this “Quran” is the truth. Is it not enough 
that your Lord is a Witness over all things? 54. They are truly in doubt of 
the meeting with their Lord! "But" He is indeed Fully Aware of everything. 
kk 


42. Consultation 
(Ash-Shira) 


This Meccan sûrah takes its name from verse 38 which talks about 
conducting affairs by mutual consultation as one of the qualities of the true 
believers. The sûrah emphasizes that Allah has decreed for Muslims the 
same religion ordained for all the previous prophets. The believers are 
commanded to resort to Allah’s judgment if disagreement arises. Allah’s 
oneness, power, and wisdom are emphasized as the pagans’ faith in 
powerless idols is condemned. Both the end of this sûrah and the beginning 
of the next stress the fact that the Quran has been revealed by Allah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah Almighty 

1. Ha-Mim. 2. ’Ain-Sin-Qdf. 3. And so you "O Prophet’ are sent revelation, 
just like those before you, by Allah—the Almighty, All-Wise. 4. To Him 
belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And He is 
the Most High, the Greatest. 5. The heavens nearly burst, one above the 
other, ‘in awe of Him’. And the angels glorify the praises of their Lord, and 
seek forgiveness for those on earth. Surely Allah alone is the All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful. 


Allah Is the Protector 

6. As for those who take other protectors besides Him, Allah is Watchful 
over them. And you "O Prophet’ are not a keeper over them. 7. And so We 
have revealed to you a Quran in Arabic, so you may warn the Mother of 
Cities!222! and everyone around it, and warn of the Day of Gathering— 
about which there is no doubt—'when’ a group will be in Paradise and 
another in the Blaze. 8. Had Allah willed, He could have easily made all 
"humanity" into a single community ‘of believers’. But He admits into His 
mercy whoever He wills. And the wrongdoers will have no protector or 
helper. 9. How can they take protectors besides Him? Allah alone is the 
Protector. He ‘alone’ gives life to the dead. And He ‘alone’ is Most Capable 
of everything. 


Advice to the Believers 
10. "Say to the believers, O Prophet,’ “Whatever you may differ about, its 
judgment rests with Allah. That is Allah—my Lord. In Him I put my trust, 
and to Him I ‘always’ turn.” 


Allah Is the Creator and Provider 
11. "He is’ the Originator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you 
spouses from among yourselves, and ‘made’ mates for cattle ‘as well’— 
multiplying you "both". There is nothing like Him, for He ‘alone’ is the All- 
Hearing, All-Seeing. 12. To Him belong the keys ‘of the treasuries’ of the 
heavens and the earth. He gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever 
He wills. Indeed, He has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


One Message, Different Laws!2231 
13. He has ordained for you ‘believers’ the Way which He decreed for 
Noah, and what We have revealed to you "O Prophet’ and what We decreed 
for Abraham, Moses, and Jesus,!2%! "commanding: “Uphold the faith, and 
make no divisions in it.” What you call the polytheists to is unbearable for 
them. Allah chooses for Himself whoever He wills, and guides to Himself 
whoever turns ‘to Him’. 14. They did not split ‘into sects’ out of mutual 
envy until knowledge came to them.'2%5! Had it not been for a prior decree 
from your Lord for an appointed term,'2%2! the matter would have certainly 
been settled between them ‘at once’. And surely those who were made to 
inherit the Scripture!222! after them are truly in alarming doubt about this 
"Quran". 
Call to the People of the Book 

15. Because of that, you "O Prophet’ will invite ‘all’. Be steadfast as you are 
commanded, and do not follow their desires. And say, “I believe in every 
Scripture Allah has revealed. And I am commanded to judge fairly among 
you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. We will be accountable for our deeds 
and you for yours. There is no ‘need for’ contention between us. Allah will 
gather us together ‘for judgment’. And to Him is the final return.” 16. As 
for those who dispute about Allah after He is ‘already’ acknowledged "by 
many’, their argument is futile in the sight of their Lord. Upon them is 
wrath, and they will suffer a severe punishment. 


A Reminder of the Hour 


17. It is Allah Who has revealed the Book with the truth and the balance ‘of 
justice’. You never know, perhaps the Hour is near. 18. Those who 
disbelieve in it ‘ask to` hasten it "mockingly’. But the believers are fearful of 
it, knowing that it is the truth. Surely those who dispute about the Hour 
have gone far astray. 


Allah’s Graciousness 
19. Allah is Ever Kind to His servants. He provides ‘abundantly’ to 
whoever He wills. And He is the All-Powerful, Almighty. 


Worldly Gains and Heavenly Rewards 
20. Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase their 
harvest. And whoever desires ‘only’ the harvest of this world, We will give 
them some of it, but they will have no share in the Hereafter. 


Reward of the Believers and Polytheists 

21. Or do they have associate-gods who have ordained for them some 
"polytheistic’ beliefs, which Allah has not authorized? Had it not been for 
"prior’ decree on Judgment, the matter would have certainly been settled 
between them ‘at once’. And surely the wrongdoers will suffer a painful 
punishment. 22. You will see the wrongdoers fearful ‘of the punishment’ for 
what they committed but it will be inevitable for them, whereas those who 
believe and do good will be in the lush Gardens of Paradise. They will have 
whatever they desire from their Lord. That is ‘truly’ the greatest bounty. 23. 
That ‘reward’ is the good news which Allah gives to His servants who 
believe and do good. Say, “O Prophet,’ “I do not ask you "Meccans’ for a 
reward for this "message’—only honour for "our" kinship.”'228! Whoever 
earns a good deed, We will increase it in goodness for them. Surely Allah is 
All-Forgiving, Most Appreciative. 


The Quran Fabricated? 
24. Or do they say, “He has fabricated a lie about Allah!”? "If you had,’ 
Allah would have sealed your heart, if He willed. And Allah wipes out 
falsehood and establishes the truth by His Words. He certainly knows best 
what is “hidden” in the heart. 


Allah’s Grace and Might 
25. He is the One Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons 
‘their’ sins. And He knows whatever you do. 26. He responds to those who 


believe and do good, and increases their reward out of His grace. As for the 
disbelievers, they will suffer a severe punishment. 


Allah’s Mercy: Provisions and Rain 
27. Had Allah given abundant provisions to ‘all’ His servants, they would 
have certainly transgressed throughout the land. But He sends down 
whatever He wills in perfect measure. He is truly All-Aware, All-Seeing of 
His servants. 28. He is the One Who sends down rain after people have 
given up hope, spreading out His mercy. He is the Guardian, the 
Praiseworthy. 


Allah’s Mercy: The Universe 
29. And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and 
all living beings He dispersed throughout both. And He is Most Capable of 
bringing all together whenever He wills. 30. Whatever affliction befalls you 
is because of what your own hands have committed. And He pardons much. 
31. You can never escape "Him’ on earth, nor do you have any protector or 
helper besides Allah. 

Allah’s Mercy: Sailing Ships 
32. And among His signs are the ships like mountains ‘sailing’ in the sea. 
33. If He wills, He can calm the wind, leaving the ships motionless on the 
water. Surely in this are signs for whoever is steadfast, grateful. 34. Or He 
can wreck the ships for what the people have committed—though He 
forgives much— 35. so those who dispute about Our signs may know that 
they have no refuge. 


Qualities of the Devout 
36. Whatever ‘pleasure’ you have been given is ‘no more than a fleeting’ 
enjoyment of this worldly life. But what is with Allah is far better and more 
lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord; 37. who avoid 
major sins and shameful deeds, and forgive when angered; 38. who respond 
to their Lord, establish prayer, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, 
and donate from what We have provided for them; 39. and who enforce 
justice when wronged. 40. The reward of an evil deed is its equivalent. But 
whoever pardons and seeks reconciliation, then their reward is with Allah. 
He certainly does not like the wrongdoers. 41. There is no blame on those 
who enforce justice after being wronged. 42. Blame is only on those who 


wrong people and transgress in the land unjustly. It is they who will suffer a 
painful punishment. 43. And whoever endures patiently and forgives— 
surely this is a resolve to aspire to. 


The Wicked on Judgment Day 

44. And whoever Allah leaves to stray will have no guide after Him. You 
will see the wrongdoers, when they face the torment, pleading, “Is there any 
way back ‘to the world’?” 45. And you will see them exposed to the Fire, 
fully humbled out of disgrace, stealing glances ‘at it’. And the believers will 
say, “The ‘true’ losers are those who have lost themselves and their families 
on Judgment Day.” The wrongdoers will certainly be in everlasting torment. 
46. They will have no protectors to help them against Allah. And whoever 
Allah leaves to stray, for them there is no way. 


Warning to Ungrateful Disbelievers 

47. Respond to your Lord before the coming of a Day from Allah that 
cannot be averted. There will be no refuge for you then, nor ‘grounds for’ 
denial ‘of sins’.!2%! 48. But if they turn away, We have not sent you "O 
Prophet’ as a keeper over them. Your duty is only to deliver ‘the message’. 
And indeed, when We let someone taste a mercy from Us, they become 
prideful "because’ of it. But when afflicted with evil because of what their 
hands have done, then one becomes totally ungrateful, [10001 


Allah’s Gift of Children 
49. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He 
creates whatever He wills. He blesses whoever He wills with daughters, and 
blesses whoever He wills with sons, 50. or grants both, sons and daughters, 
"to whoever He wills’, and leaves whoever He wills infertile. He is indeed 
All-Knowing, Most Capable. 


Forms of Divine Communication 
51. It is not ‘possible’ for a human being to have Allah communicate with 
them, except through inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by sending a 
messenger-angel to reveal whatever He wills by His permission. He is 
surely Most High, All-Wise. 


The Light of the Quran 
52. And so We have sent to you "O Prophet’ a revelation by Our command. 
You did not know of ‘this’ Book and faith "before". But We have made it a 


light, by which We guide whoever We will of Our servants. And you are 
truly leading ‘all’ to the Straight Path— 53. the Path of Allah, to Whom 
belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Surely to 
Allah all matters will return "for judgment’. 

kkk 


43. Ornaments 
(Az-Zukhruf) 


This Meccan sirah takes its name from the ornaments mentioned in verse 
35. The pagans are scorned for following their forefathers blindly,jlabelling 
the angels as Allah’s daughters, claiming that Muhammad ( :{z772) is not 
worthy to receive revelations because he is not rich, and 6r ĝssociating 
idols with Allah in worship, although they admit that He is the sole Creator 
of the heavens and the earth. Similar to the next sûrah, the pagans are 
warned of a horrifying punishment in Hell and the believers are promised a 
great reward in Paradise. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Excellence of the Quran 
1. Ha-Mim. 2. By the clear Book! 3. Certainly, We have made it a Quran in 
Arabic so perhaps you will understand. 4. And indeed, it is—in the Master 
Record! with Us—highly esteemed, rich in wisdom. 


Warning to the Deniers 
5. Should We then turn the ‘Quranic’ Reminder away from you ‘simply’ 
because you have been a transgressing people? 6. ‘Imagine’ how many 
prophets We sent to those "destroyed" before! 7. But no prophet ever came 
to them without being mocked. 8. So We destroyed those who were far 
mightier than these "Meccans’. The examples of ‘their’ predecessors have 
"already" been related.! 1002! 


Allah Is the Creator 
9. If you ask them "O Prophet’ who created the heavens and the earth, they 
will certainly say, “The Almighty, All-Knowing did.” 10. "He is the One’ 
Who has laid out the earth for you, and set in it pathways for you so that 
you may find your way. 11. And "He is the One’ Who sends down rain from 
the sky in perfect measure, with which We give life to a lifeless land. And 
so will you be brought forth "from the grave’. 12. And "He is the One’ Who 
created all "things in” pairs,'22°2! and made for you ships and animals to ride 
13. so that you may sit firmly on their backs, and remember your Lord’s 


blessings once you are settled on them, saying, “Glory be to the One Who 
has subjected these for us, for we could have never done so ‘on our own’. 
14. And surely to our Lord we will ‘all’ return.” 


Allah’s Daughters? 

15. Still the pagans have made some of His creation out to be a part of Him. 
[1004] Indeed, humankind is clearly ungrateful. 16. Has He taken ‘angels as 
His’ daughters from what He created, and favoured you "O pagans’ with 
sons? 17. Whenever one of them is given the good news of what they 
attribute to the Most Compassionate,'4@5! his face grows gloomy, as he 
suppresses his rage. 18. "Do they attribute to Him’ those who are brought up 
in fineries and are not commanding in disputes? 19. Still they have labelled 
the angels, who are servants of the Most Compassionate, as female. Did 
they witness their creation? Their statement will be recorded, and they will 
be questioned! 


Blind Following 
20. And they argue, “Had the Most Compassionate willed, we would have 
never worshipped them.” They have no knowledge ‘in support’ of this 
‘claim’. They do nothing but lie. 21. Or have We given them a Book ‘for 
proof’, before this ‘Quran’, to which they are holding firm? 22. In fact, they 
say, “We found our forefathers following a ‘particular’ way, and we are 
following in their footsteps.” 23. Similarly, whenever We sent a warner to a 
society before you "O Prophet’, its ‘spoiled’ elite would say, “We found our 
forefathers following a ‘particular’ way, and we are walking in their 
footsteps.” 24. Each ‘wamer’ asked, “Even if what I brought you is better 
guidance than what you found your forefathers practicing?” They replied, 
“We totally reject whatever you have been sent with.” 25. So We inflicted 
punishment upon them. See then what was the fate of the deniers! 
The Case of Abraham’s People 

26. "Remember, O Prophet’ when Abraham declared to his father and his 
people, “I am totally free of whatever ‘gods’ you worship, 27. except the 
One Who originated me, and He will surely guide me.” 28. And he left this 
enduring declaration among his descendants, so they may ‘always’ turn 
back ‘to Allah’.!1006! 


The Case of Meccan Pagans 


29. In fact, I had allowed enjoyment for these "Meccans’ and their 
forefathers, until the truth came to them along with a messenger making 
things clear. 30. "But’ when the truth came to them, they said, “This is 
magic, and we totally reject it.” 31. And they exclaimed, “If only this Quran 
was revealed to a great man from ‘one of" the two cities!”'47! 32. Is it they 
who distribute your Lord’s mercy? We ‘alone’ have distributed their ‘very’ 
livelihood among them in this worldly life and raised some of them in rank 
above others so that some may employ others in service. “But’ your Lord’s 
mercy is far better than whatever ‘wealth’ they amass. 


Worthlessness of Material Wealth 

33. Were it not that people might ‘be tempted to’ become one community 
"of disbelievers’, We would have supplied the homes of ‘only’ those who 
disbelieve in the Most Compassionate with silver roofs and ‘silver’ 
Stairways to ascend, 34. as well as ‘silver’ gates and thrones to recline on, 
35. and ornaments ‘of gold’. Yet all this is no more than a ‘fleeting’ 
enjoyment in this worldly life. "But’ the Hereafter with your Lord is ‘only’ 
for those mindful ‘of Him’. 


Devilish Associates 

36. And whoever turns a blind eye to the Reminder of the Most 
Compassionate, We place at the disposal of each a devilish one as their 
close associate, 37. who will certainly hinder them from the "Right’ Way 
while they think they are ‘rightly’ guided. 38. But when such a person 
comes to Us, one will say ‘to their associate’, “I wish you were as distant 
from me as the east is from the west! What an evil associate "you were!” 
39. ‘It will be said to both,’ “Since you all did wrong, sharing in the 
punishment will be of no benefit to you this Day.”!1028! 


Advice to the Prophet 
40. Can you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind or those clearly astray? 
41. Even if We take you away ‘from this world’, We will surely inflict 
punishment upon them. 42. Or if We show you what We threaten them with, 
We certainly have full power over them. 43. So hold firmly to what has 
been revealed to you "O Prophet’. You are truly on the Straight Path. 44. 
Surely this "Quran’ is a glory for you and your people. And you will ‘all’ be 
questioned ‘about it’. 45. Ask ‘the followers of’ the messengers that We 


already sent before you if We ‘ever’ appointed ‘other’ gods to be 
worshipped besides the Most Compassionate. 


The Case of Pharaoh’s People 

46. Indeed, We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, and he 
said: “I am a messenger of the Lord of all worlds.” 47. But as soon as he 
came to them with Our signs, they laughed at them, 48. although every sign 
We showed them was greater than the one before. {12091 Ultimately, We 
seized them with torments so that they might return "to the Right Path’.!1010] 
49. "Then’ they pleaded, “O ‘mighty’ magician! Pray to your Lord on our 
behalf, by virtue of the covenant He made with you.!®™! We will certainly 
accept guidance.” 50. But as soon as We removed the torments from them, 
they broke their promise. 


Pharaoh’s Arrogance 

51. And Pharaoh called out to his people, boasting, “O my people! Am I not 
sovereign over Egypt as well as “all” these streams!!®?! flowing at my feet? 
Can you not see? 52. Am I not better than this nobody who can hardly 
express himself?!1213! 53. Why then have no golden bracelets "of kingship’ 
been granted to him or angels come with him as escorts!” 54. And so he 
fooled his people, and they obeyed him. They were truly a rebellious 
people. 55. So when they enraged Us, We inflicted punishment upon them, 
drowning them all. 56. And We made them an example and a lesson for 
those after them. 


All Objects of Worship in Hell? 
57. When the son of Mary was cited as an example ‘in argument’, your 
people "O Prophet” broke into "joyful" applause.!!24! 58. They exclaimed, 
“Which is better: our gods or Jesus?” They cite him only to argue. In fact, 
they are a people prone to dispute. 59. He was only a servant We showed 
favour to, and made as an example for the Children of Israel. 60. Had We 
willed, We could have easily replaced you “all” with angels,!42!5! succeeding 
one another on earth. 61. And his "second" coming is truly a sign for the 
Hour. So have no doubt about it, and follow me. This is the Straight Path. 
62. And do not let Satan hinder you, ‘for’ he is certainly your sworn enemy. 


The Truth About Jesus 


63. When Jesus came with clear proofs, he declared, “I have come to you 
with wisdom, and to clarify to you some of what you differ about. So fear 
Allah, and obey me. 64. Surely Allah ‘alone’ is my Lord and your Lord, so 
worship Him ‘alone’. This is the Straight Path.” 65. Yet their ‘various’ 
groups have differed among themselves ‘about him’, so woe to the 
wrongdoers when they face the torment of a painful Day! 66. Are they 
waiting for the Hour to take them by surprise when they least expect ‘it’? 


Reward of the Righteous 

67. Close friends will be enemies to one another on that Day, except the 
righteous, 68. ‘who will be told,’ “O My servants! There is no fear for you 
Today, nor will you grieve— 69. ‘those’ who believed in Our signs and 
‘fully’ submitted ‘to Us’. 70. Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, 
rejoicing.” 71. Golden trays and cups will be passed around to them. There 
will be whatever the souls desire and the eyes delight in. And you will be 
there forever. 72. That is the Paradise which you will be awarded for what 
you used to do. 73. There you will have abundant fruit!2216! to eat from. 


Reward of the Wicked 
74. Indeed, the wicked will be in the torment of Hell forever. 75. It will 
never be lightened for them, and there they will be overwhelmed with 
despair. 76. We did not wrong them, but it was they who were the 
wrongdoers. 77. They will cry, “O Malik!!42/2! Let your Lord finish us off.” 
He will answer, “You are definitely here to stay.” 78. We certainly brought 
the truth to you, but most of you were resentful of the truth. 


Warning to the Polytheists 

79. Or have they mastered some ‘evil’ plan? Then We ‘too’ are surely 
planning. 80. Or do they think that We do not hear their “evil’ thoughts and 
secret talks? Yes "We do’! And Our messenger-angels are in their presence, 
recording ‘it all’. 81. Say, "O Prophet,’ “If the Most Compassionate ‘really’ 
had offspring, I would be the first worshipper.” 82. Glorified is the Lord of 
the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, far above what they 
claim. 83. So let them indulge ‘in falsehood’ and amuse ‘themselves’ until 
they face their Day, which they have been warned of. 


The Only God Worthy of Worship 


84. It is He Who is ‘the only’ God in the heavens and "the only’ God on the 
earth. For He is the All-Wise, All-Knowing. 85. And Blessed is the One to 
Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in 
between! With Him ‘alone’ is the knowledge of the Hour. And to Him you 
will ‘all’ be returned. 


Call to the Worshippers of False Gods 
86. ‘But’ those ‘objects of worship’ they invoke besides Him have no power 
to intercede, except those who testify to the truth knowingly.228! 87. If you 
ask them "O Prophet’ who created them, they will certainly say, “Allah!” 
How can they then be deluded ‘from the truth’? 88. "Allah is Aware of" the 
Prophet’s cry: “O my Lord! Indeed, these are a people who persist in 
disbelief.” 89. So bear with them and respond with peace. They will soon 
come to know. 
kkk 


44. The Haze 
(Ad-Dukhan) 


This Meccan sirah takes its name from the haze (caused by drought), which 
is mentioned in verse 10. Similar to the previous stirah, the Meccan pagans 
are equated with Pharaoh’s people for going back on their promise of full 
submission to Allah once the plague is removed from them. The Quran is 
said to have been revealed on a blessed night for the guidance of humanity. 
Those who embrace its guidance will be honoured in Paradise and those 
who reject it will be debased in Hell. This fate is the underlying theme in the 
next surah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Quran as a Mercy 

1. Ha-Mim. 2. By the clear Book! 3. Indeed, We sent it down on a blessed 
night,!2219! for We always warn ‘against evil’. 4. On that night every matter 
of wisdom is ordained 5. by a command from Us, for We have always sent 
"messengers 6. as a mercy from your Lord. He ‘alone’ is truly the All- 
Hearing, All-Knowing— 7. the Lord of the heavens and the earth and 
everything in between, if only you had sure faith. 8. There is no god 
“worthy of worship" except Him. He ‘alone’ gives life and causes death. "He 
is’ your Lord, and the Lord of your forefathers. 


Meccans Warned of Famine!42201. 


9. In fact, they are in doubt, amusing themselves. 10. Wait then "O Prophet’ 
for the day "when" the sky will be veiled in haze,'224) clearly visible, 11. 
overwhelming the people. "They will cry,’ “This is a painful torment. 12. 
Our Lord! Remove ‘this’ torment from us, ‘and’ we will certainly believe.” 
13. How can they be reminded when a messenger has already come to 
them, making things clear, 14. then they turned away from him, saying, “A 
madman, taught by others!”? 15. Indeed, We will remove ‘that’ torment for 
a while, and you "Meccans’ will return "to disbelief’. 16. "Then’ on the Day 
We will deal “you' the fiercest blow, We will surely inflict punishment. 


Moses and Pharaoh’s People 


17. Indeed, before them We tested Pharaoh’s people: a noble messenger 
came to them, 18. ‘proclaiming,’ “Hand over the servants of Allah to me. 
[1022] I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you. 19. And do not be arrogant 
with Allah. I have certainly come to you with a compelling proof. 20. And 
indeed, I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord so you do not stone me 
‘to death’. 21. "But’ if you do not believe me, then let me be.” 22. 
Ultimately, he cried out to his Lord, “These are a wicked people!” 


Tyrants Destroyed 

23. ‘Allah responded,’ “Leave with My servants at night, for you will surely 
be pursued. 24. And leave the sea parted, for they are certainly an army 
bound to drown.” 25. ‘Imagine’ how many gardens and springs the 
tyrants!023] Jeft behind, 26. as well as ‘various’ crops and splendid 
residences, 27. and luxuries which they fully enjoyed. 28. So it was. And 
We awarded it ‘all’ to another people. 29. Neither heaven nor earth wept 
over them, nor was their fate delayed. 30. And We certainly delivered the 
Children of Israel from the humiliating torment 31. of Pharaoh. He was 
truly a tyrant, a transgressor. 32. And indeed, We chose the Israelites 
knowingly above the others. 33. And We showed them signs in which there 
was a Clear test. 


Warning to Deniers of Resurrection 
34. Indeed, these "Meccans’ say, 35. “There is nothing beyond our first 
death, and we will never be resurrected. 36. Bring ‘back’ our forefathers, if 
what you say is true.” 37. Are they superior to the people of Tubba’!1224! 
and those before them? We destroyed them ‘all’, ‘for’ they were truly 
wicked. 38. We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in 
between for sport. 39. We only created them for a purpose, but most of 
these ‘pagans’ do not know. 40. Surely the Day of ‘Final’ Decision is the 
time appointed for all— 41. the Day no kith or kin will be of benefit to 
another whatsoever, nor will they be helped, 42. except those shown mercy 
by Allah. He is truly the Almighty, Most Merciful. 
The Tree of Hell 

43. Surely "the fruit of" the tree of Zaqqtim!1225! 44. will be the food of the 
evildoer. 45. Like molten metal, it will boil in the bellies 46. like the boiling 
of hot water. 47. "It will be said,’ “Seize them and drag them into the depths 


of the Hellfire. 48. Then pour over their heads the torment of boiling 
water.” 49. ‘The wicked will be told,’ “Taste this. You mighty, noble one! 
[1026] 50, This is truly what you “all” used to doubt.” 


The Pleasures of Paradise 

51. Indeed, the righteous will be in a secure place, 52. amid Gardens and 
springs, 53. dressed in fine silk and rich brocade, facing one another. 54. So 
it will be. And We will pair them to maidens with gorgeous eyes. 55. There 
they will call for every fruit in serenity. 56. There they will never taste 
death, beyond the first death. And He will protect them from the 
punishment of the Hellfire— 57. as ‘an act of’ grace from your Lord. That 
is ‘truly’ the ultimate triumph. 


The Quran Is Easy 
58. Indeed, We have made this ‘Quran" easy in your own language "O 
Prophet’ so perhaps they will be mindful. 59. Wait then! They too are 
certainly waiting. 
oe oie oe 


45. The Kneeling 
(Al-Jathiyah) 


This Meccan surah, which takes its name from the kneeling of every faith- 
community on Judgment Day mentioned in verse 28, is critical of those who 
turn away from Allah’s revelations, deny the Resurrection, ridicule the 
truth, and fail to appreciate Allah’s countless favours and marvels of 
creation. The dreadful judgment of these deniers is featured in the last part 
of the strah. All these themes are emphasized in the next stirah as well. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Signs 

1. Ha-Mim. 2. The revelation of this Book is from Allah—the Almighty, 
All-Wise. 3. Surely in "the creation of’ the heavens and the earth are signs 
for the believers. 4. And in your own creation, and whatever living beings 
He dispersed, are signs for people of sure faith. 5. And ‘in’ the alternation of 
the day and the night, the provision!/222! sent down from the skies by Allah 
—reviving the earth after its death—and the shifting of the winds, are signs 
for people of understanding. 6. These are Allah’s revelations which We 
recite to you "O Prophet’ in truth. So what message will they believe in after 
denying’ Allah and His revelations? 


Warning to the Deniers 

7. Woe to every sinful liar. 8. They hear Allah’s revelations recited to them, 
then persist ‘in denial’ arrogantly as if they did not hear them. So give them 
good news of a painful punishment. 9. And whenever they learn anything of 
Our revelations, they make a mockery of it. It is they who will suffer a 
humiliating punishment. 10. Awaiting them is Hell. Their ‘worldly’ gains 
will not be of any benefit to them whatsoever, nor will those protectors they 
have taken besides Allah. And they will suffer a tremendous punishment. 
11. This ‘Quran’ is ‘true’ guidance. And those who deny their Lord’s 
revelations will suffer the ‘worst’ torment of agonizing pain. 


Allah’s Favours to Humanity 


12. Allah is the One Who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may 
sail upon it by His command, and that you may seek His bounty, and that 
perhaps you will be grateful. 13. He ‘also’ subjected for you whatever is in 
the heavens and whatever is on the earth—all by His grace. Surely in this 
are signs for people who reflect. 


Advice to the Believers 
14. "O Prophet!" Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear Allah’s 
days ‘of torment’, so that He will reward each group for what they used to 
commit. 15. Whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. And whoever 
does evil, it is to their own loss. Then to your Lord you will ‘all’ be 
returned. 


Differences Among the Israelites 
16. Indeed, We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, wisdom, and 
prophethood; granted them good, lawful provisions; and favoured them 
above the others.!19281 17, We ‘also’ gave them clear commandments 
regarding ‘their’ faith. But it was not until knowledge came to them that 
they differed out of mutual envy.!!229! Surely your Lord will judge between 
them on the Day of Judgment regarding their differences. 


Advice to the Prophet 
18. Now We have set you "O Prophet’ on the ‘clear’ Way of faith. So follow 
it, and do not follow the desires of those who do not know ‘the truth’. 19. 
They certainly can be of no benefit to you against Allah whatsoever. Surely 
the wrongdoers are patrons of each other, whereas Allah is the Patron of the 
righteous. 20. This “Quran” is an insight for humanity—a guide and mercy 
for people of sure faith. 


Good and Evil Are Not Equal 
21. Or do those who commit evil deeds ‘simply’ think that We will make 
them equal—in their life and after their death—to those who believe and do 
good? How wrong is their judgment! 22. For Allah created the heavens and 
the earth for a purpose, so that every soul may be paid back for what it has 
committed. And none will be wronged. 


Those Led by Desire 
23. Have you seen "O Prophet’ those who have taken their own desires as 
their god? ‘And so’ Allah left them to stray knowingly, sealed their hearing 


and hearts, and placed a cover on their sight. Who then can guide them after 
Allah? Will you ‘all’ not then be mindful? 


Arguments of the Deniers of Resurrection 

24. And they argue, “There is nothing beyond our worldly life. We die; 
others are born. And nothing destroys us but ‘the passage of’ time.” Yet 
they have no knowledge ‘in support’ of this ‘claim’. They only speculate. 
25. And whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, their only 
argument is to say: “Bring our forefathers back, if what you say is true!” 26. 
Say, "O Prophet,’ “It is* Allah "Who’ gives you life, then causes you to die, 
then will gather you ‘all’ on the Day of Judgment, about which there is no 
doubt. But most people do not know.” 


The Judgment 
27. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On 
the Day the Hour will be established, the people of falsehood will then be in 
“total” loss. 28. And you will see every faith-community on its knees. Every 
community will be summoned to its record ‘of deeds’. "They all will be 
told,’ “This Day you will be rewarded for what you used to do. 29. This 
record of Ours speaks the truth about you. Indeed, We always had your 


1°99 


deeds recorded ‘by the angels’. 


Reward of the Believers 
30. As for those who believed and did good, their Lord will admit them into 
His mercy. That is ‘truly’ the absolute triumph. 


Punishment of the Disbelievers 
31. And as for those who disbelieved, ‘they will be told," “Were My 
revelations not recited to you, yet you acted arrogantly and were a wicked 
people? 32. And whenever it was said ‘to you’, ‘Surely Allah’s promise ‘of 
judgment’ is true and there is no doubt about the Hour,’ you said 
“mockingly', “We do not know what the Hour is! We think it is no more 
than speculation, and we are not convinced ‘that it will ever come’.’” 33. 
And the evil ‘consequences’ of their deeds will unfold before them, and 
they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule. 34. It will be said, 
“This Day We will neglect you as you neglected the meeting of this Day of 
yours! Your home will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers. 35. This is 
because you made a mockery of Allah’s revelations, and were deluded by 


‘your’ worldly life.” So ‘from’ that Day ‘on’ they will not be taken out of 
the Fire, nor will they be allowed to appease ‘their Lord’. 


Praises to the Almighty 
36. So all praise is for Allah—Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, 
Lord of all worlds. 37. To Him belongs ‘all’ Majesty in the heavens and the 
earth. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 
kkk 


46. The Sand-Hills 
(Al-A hgGf) 


This Meccan sirah takes its name fromghggsand-hills mentioned in verse 21 
in the story of the people of Hid ( .{z-/;) who were destroyed for their 
disbelief, even though they were far upeérior to the Arab pagans (verses 21- 
28). Again, Allah’s infinite power is contrasted with the powerlessness of 
the idols. The pagan arguments against the Quran and the Resurrection are 
refuted, and reference is made to a group of jinn who readily embraced the 
truth pace they heard the Prophet’s recitation of the Quran. The Prophet 
T eb? is urged to be patient, and reminded of the fate awaiting those who 
nge the truth at the end of this sûrah and the beginning of the next. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


A Message to Idolaters 

1. Ha-Mim. 2. The revelation of this Book is from Allah—the Almighty, 
All-Wise. 3. We only created the heavens and the earth and everything in 
between for a purpose and an appointed term. Yet the disbelievers are 
turning away from what they have been warned about. 4. Ask ‘them, O 
Prophet’, “Have you considered whatever ‘idols’ you invoke besides Allah? 
Show me what they have created on earth! Or do they have a share in "the 
creation of’ the heavens? Bring me a scripture ‘revealed’ before this "Quran" 
or a shred of knowledge, if what you say is true.” 5. And who could be 
more astray than those who call upon others besides Allah—‘others* that 
cannot respond to them until the Day of Judgment, and are "even’ unaware 
of their calls? 6. And when ‘such’ people will be gathered together, those 
gods’ will be their enemies and will disown their worship. 


Pagan Denial of the Quran 
7. Whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers say 
of the truth when it has come to them, “This is pure magic.” 8. Or do they 
say, “Hel4230] has fabricated this "Quran"!”? Say, "O Prophet,” “If I have 
done so, then there is nothing whatsoever you can do to save me from 
Allah. He knows best what ‘slurs* you indulge about it. Sufficient is He as a 


Witness between you and me. And He is the All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” 
9. Say, “I am not the first messenger ever sent, nor do I know what will 
happen to me or you. I only follow what is revealed to me. And I am only 
sent with a clear warning.” 


Pagan Arrogance Towards Allah 
10. Ask ‘them, O Prophet’, “Consider if this ‘Quran’ is ‘truly’ from Allah 
and you deny it, and a witness from the Children of Israel attests to it and 
then believes,!192!! whereas you act arrogantly. Surely Allah does not guide 
the wrongdoing people.” 


Belittling the Quran 
11. The disbelievers say of the believers, “Had it been "something" good, 
they!4232] would not have beaten us to it.” Now since they reject its 
guidance, they will say, “This is’ an ancient fabrication!” 12. And before 
this “Quran’ the Book of Moses was ‘revealed as* a guide and mercy. And 
this Book is a confirmation, in the Arabic tongue, to warn those who do 
wrong, and as good news to those who do good. 


Reward of the Devout 
13. Surely those who say, “Our Lord is Allah,” and then remain steadfast— 
there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 14. It is they who will 
be the residents of Paradise, staying there forever, as a reward for what they 
used to do. 


Stance of the Faithful 

15. We have commanded people to honour their parents. Their mothers bore 
them in hardship and delivered them in hardship. Their ‘period of* bearing 
and weaning is thirty months. In time, when the child reaches their prime at 
the age of forty, they pray, “My Lord! Inspire me to ‘always’ be thankful for 
Your favours which You blessed me and my parents with, and to do good 
deeds that please You. And instil righteousness in my offspring. I truly 
repent to You, and I truly submit ‘to Your Will’.” 16. It is from these 
people’ that We will accept the good they did, and overlook their misdeeds 
—along with the residents of Paradise, ‘in fulfilment of’ the true promise 
they have been given. 


Stance of the Deniers 


17. But some scold their parents, “Enough with you! Are you warning me 
that I will be brought forth "from the grave’, while many generations had 
already perished before me ‘for good"?” The parents cry to Allah for help, 
"and warn their child,’ “Pity you. Have faith! Surely Allah’s promise is 
true.” But the deniers insist, “This is nothing but ancient fables.” 18. These 
are the ones against whom the fate of earlier communities of jinn and 
humans has been justified, ‘for’ they were truly losers. 


Reward of the Faithful and the Deniers 

19. Each ‘of the two groups’ will be ranked according to what they have 
done so He may fully reward all. And none will be wronged. 20. "Watch 
for’ the Day ‘when’ the disbelievers will be exposed to the Fire. "They will 
be told,’ “You ‘already’ exhausted your ‘share of" pleasures during your 
worldly life, and ‘fully’ enjoyed them. So Today you will be rewarded with 
the torment of disgrace for your arrogance throughout the land with no 
right, and for your rebelliousness.” 


Prophet Hûd 

21. And remember the brother of ’Ad, when he warned his people, who 
inhabited the sand-hills!4023!_there were certainly warners before and after 
him—' saying,’ “Worship none but Allah. I truly fear for you the torment of 
a tremendous day.” 22. They argued, “Have you come to turn us away from 
our gods? Bring us then whatever you threaten us with, if what you say is 
true.” 23. He responded, “The knowledge ‘of its time’ is only with Allah. I 
only convey to you what I have been sent with. But I can see that you are a 
people acting ignorantly.” 24. Then when they saw the torment as a ‘dense’ 
cloud approaching their valleys, they said ‘happily’, “This is a cloud 
bringing us rain.” ‘But Had replied,’ “No, it is what you sought to hasten: a 
‘fierce’ wind carrying a painful punishment!” 25. It destroyed everything by 
the command of its Lord, leaving nothing visible except their ruins. This is 
how We reward the wicked people. 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 
26. Indeed, We had established them!!24! in a way We have not established 
you “Meccans”. And We gave them hearing, sight, and intellect. But neither 
their hearing, sight, nor intellect were of any benefit to them whatsoever, 
since they persisted in denying Allah’s signs. And ‘so’ they were 


overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule. 27. We certainly destroyed the 
societies around you after having varied the signs so perhaps they would 
return ‘to the Right Path’. 28. Why then did those ‘idols’ they took as gods 
—hoping to get closer "to Him’—not come to their aid? Instead, they failed 
them. That is "the result of" their lies and their fabrications. 


The Jinn Listen to the Quran 

29. "Remember, O Prophet,’ when We sent a group of jinn your way to 
listen to the Quran. Then, upon hearing it, they said ‘to one another’, 
“Listen quietly!” Then when it was over, they returned to their fellow jinn 
as warmers. 30. They declared, “O our fellow jinn! We have truly heard a 
scripture revealed after Moses, confirming what came before it. It guides to 
the truth and the Straight Way. 31. O our fellow jinn! Respond to the caller 
of Allah and believe in him, He will forgive your sins and protect you from 
a painful punishment. 32. And whoever does not respond to the caller of 
Allah will have no escape on earth, nor will they have any protectors 
against Him. It is they who are clearly astray.” 


Warning to Deniers of Resurrection 
33. Do they not realize that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth 
and did not tire in creating them,!4235] is able to give life to the dead? Yes 
"indeed"! He is certainly Most Capable of everything. 34. And on the Day 
the disbelievers will be exposed to the Fire, ‘they will be asked,’ “Is this 
"Hereafter’ not the truth?” They will cry, “Absolutely, by our Lord!” It will 
be said, “Then taste the punishment for your disbelief.” 


Advice to the Prophet 
35. So endure patiently, as did the Messengers of Firm Resolve.!1226! And 
do not ‘seek to` hasten ‘the torment’ for the deniers. On the Day they see 
what they have been threatened with, it will be as if they had only stayed "in 
this world" for an hour of a day.!1222! "This is" a ‘sufficient’ warning! Then, 
will anyone be destroyed except the rebellious people? 
kkk 


47. Muhammad 
(Mu hammad) 


This Medinian sûrah, which takes its title from the Prophet’s name in verse 
2, discusses the etiquette of fighting in the battlefield. The faithful believers 
are promised different types of rivers and delicacies in Paradise, whereas 
the disbelievers and the hypocrites are warned of an evil fate. To preserve 
the reward of their good deeds, the believers are urged to strive in the Way 
of Allah and donate in His cause, culminating in the clear triumph in the 
next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Reward of the Believers and Disbelievers 

1. Those who disbelieve and hinder ‘others’ from the Way of Allah, He will 
render their deeds void. 2. As for those who believe, do good, and have 
faith in what has been revealed to Muhammad—which is the truth from 
their Lord—He will absolve them of their sins and improve their condition. 
3. This is because the disbelievers follow falsehood, while the believers 
follow the truth from their Lord. This is how Allah shows people their true 
state ‘of faith’. 


Rules of Engagement!1238! 


4. So when you meet the disbelievers ‘in battle’, strike their’ necks until 
you have thoroughly subdued them, then bind them firmly. Later ‘free them 
either as’ an act of grace or by ransom until the war comes to an end. So 
will it be. Had Allah willed, He Himself’ could have inflicted punishment 
on them. But He does "this only to` test some of you by means of others. 
And those who are martyred in the cause of Allah,!4239! He will never 
render their deeds void. 5. He will guide them ‘to their reward’, improve 
their condition, 6. and admit them into Paradise, having made it known to 
them, [1040] 
Warning to the Deniers 


7. O believers! If you stand up for Allah, He will help you and make your 
steps firm. 8. As for the disbelievers, may they be doomed and may He 


render their deeds void. 9. That is because they detest what Allah has 
revealed, so He has rendered their deeds void. 10. Have they not travelled 
throughout the land to see what was the end of those before them? Allah 
annihilated them, and a similar fate awaits the disbelievers. 11. This is 
because Allah is the Patron of the believers while the disbelievers have no 
patron. 


The Final Destination 
12. Surely Allah will admit those who believe and do good into Gardens 
under which rivers flow. As for the disbelievers, they enjoy themselves and 
feed like cattle.!4°*! But the Fire will be their home. 


Evil Fate 
13. ‘Imagine, O Prophet,’ how many societies We destroyed that were far 
superior in might than your society—which drove you out—and there was 
none to help them! 14. Can those ‘believers’ who stand on clear proof from 
their Lord be like those whose evil deeds are made appealing to them and 
‘only’ follow their desires? 


Delights of Paradise 
15. The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that in it are 
rivers of fresh water, rivers of milk that never changes in taste, rivers of 
wine delicious to drink, and rivers of pure honey. There they will ‘also’ 
have all kinds of fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord. "Can they be’ like 
those who will stay in the Fire forever, left to drink boiling water that will 
tear apart their insides? 


Qualities of the Hypocrites 1) Mockery 

16. There are some of them who listen to you "O Prophet’, but when they 
depart from you, they say ‘mockingly' to those ‘believers’ gifted with 
knowledge, “What did he just say?” These are the ones whose hearts Allah 
has sealed and who ‘only’ follow their desires. 17. As for those who are 
‘rightly’ guided, He increases them in guidance and blesses them with 
righteousness. 18. Are they only waiting for the Hour to take them by 
surprise? Yet "some of" its signs have already come.!/242! Once it actually 
befalls them, will it not be too late to be mindful? 


Advice to the Prophet 


19. So, know ‘well, O Prophet,’ that there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ 
except Allah. And seek forgiveness for your shortcomings!4243! and for "the 
sins of' the believing men and women. For Allah ‘fully’ knows your 
movements and places of rest "O people’. 


Qualities of the Hypocrites 2) Cowardice 

20. And the believers say, “If only a siirah was revealed ‘allowing self- 
defence!” Yet when a precise siirah is revealed, in which fighting is 
‘explicitly’ mentioned, you see those with sickness in their hearts staring at 
you like someone in the throes of death. It would have been better for them 
21. to obey and speak rightly. Then when fighting was ordained, it surely 
would have been better for them if they were true to Allah. 22. Now if you 
‘hypocrites’ turn away, perhaps you would then spread corruption 
throughout the land and sever your ‘ties of" kinship!!10“4! 23. These are the 
ones who Allah has condemned, deafening them and blinding their eyes. 
24. Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Or are there locks upon their 
hearts? 


Warning to Hypocrites 
25. Indeed, those who relapse ‘into disbelief’ after "true' guidance has 
become clear to them, ‘it is’ Satan ‘that’ has tempted them, luring them with 
false hopes. 26. That is because they said ‘privately’ to those who ‘also’ 
detest what Allah has revealed, “We will obey you in some matters.”!1049! 
But Allah fully’ knows what they are hiding. 27. Then how ‘horrible’ will 
it be when the angels take their souls, beating their faces and backs! 28. 
This is because they follow whatever displeases Allah and hate whatever 
pleases Him, so He has rendered their deeds void. 


Another Warning to Hypocrites 
29. Or do those with sickness in their hearts think that Allah will not "be 
able to` expose their malice? 30. Had We willed, We could have truly 
shown them to you "O Prophet’, and you would have certainly recognized 
them by their appearance. But you will surely recognize them by their tone 
of speech. And Allah "fully* knows your doings "O people’. 


Wisdom Behind the Test 
31. We will certainly test you "believers’ until We prove those of you who 
“truly struggle "in Allah’s cause’ and remain steadfast, and reveal how you 


conduct yourselves. 


Reward of the Disbelievers 
32. Indeed, those who disbelieve, hinder ‘others’ from the Way of Allah, 
and defy the Messenger after ‘true’ guidance has become clear to them; they 
will not harm Allah in the least, but He will render their deeds void. 


Advice to the Believers 
33. O believers! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and do not let your 
deeds be in vain. 34. Surely those who disbelieve, hinder ‘others’ from the 
Way of Allah, and then die as disbelievers; Allah will never forgive them. 
35. So do not falter or cry for peace, for you will have the upper hand and 
Allah is with you. And He will never let your deeds go to waste. 


Test of Faith 
36. This worldly life is no more than play and amusement. But if you are 
faithful and mindful ‘of Allah’, He will grant you your ‘full’ reward, and 
will not ask you ‘to donate all’ your wealth. 37. If He were to do so and 
pressure you, you would withhold and He would bring out your resentment. 
38. Here you are, being invited to donate "a little’ in the cause of Allah. Still 
some of you withhold. And whoever does so, it is only to their own loss. 
For Allah is the Self-Sufficient, whereas you stand in need ‘of Him’. If you 
‘still’ turn away, He will replace you with another people. And they will not 
be like you. 
kkk 


48. The Triumph 
(Al-Fath) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name fromthe clear triumph (i.e., Treaty of 
Hudaibiyah) in verse 1. The Prophet ( (271z) and 1400 of his companions 
travelled to Mggca to perform the min grimage (umrah) in 6 A.H./628 
C.E. He ( (712) sent ’Uthman ibn ’Affan to let the Meccans know that the 
Muslims a “come in peace, only to visitygheg Sacred House. When the 
Meccans delayed "Uthmany ibe Prophet rae 5) thought they might have 
killed his envoy. So he ( -{z-{;) called upgn the faithful to pledge allegiance 
to him under a tree at /f ibiyah in the outskirts of Mecca. Shortly after, 
’Uthman returned safely and a peace agreement was signed by the Muslims 
and Meccan pagans, stating in part that the Muslims would have to return 
to Medina and come back next year for ’umrah. The Treaty of Hudaibiyah 
is described as a clear triumph since it established peace, temporarily 
diffused the tension between the Muslims and the Meccan pagans, and gave 
the Muslims plenty of time to spread awareness and understanding of their 
faith. Thousands from different tribes accepted Islam during that truce. The 
stirah commends the believers for proving true to Allah and His Messenggr, 
criticizes the hypocrites for not marching forth with the Prophet ( < (712), 
and condemns the pagans for denying the believers access to tia 
House. The description of the true believers both in the Torah and the 
Gospel is given at the end of Higsarah, followed by instructions on proper 
conduct with the Prophet eral and other believers in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Treaty of Hudaibiyah 
1. Indeed, We have granted you a clear triumph "O Prophet’ 2. so that Allah 
may forgive you for your past and future shortcomings,'46! perfect His 
favour upon you, guide you along the Straight Path, 3. and so that Allah 
will help you tremendously. 4. He is the One Who sent down serenity upon 
the hearts of the believers so that they may increase even more in their faith. 
To Allah ‘alone’ belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. And Allah 
is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 5. So He may admit believing men and women 


into Gardens under which rivers flow—to stay there forever—and absolve 
them of their sins. And that is a supreme achievement in the sight of Allah. 
6. Also ‘so that" He may punish hypocrite men and women and polytheistic 
men and women, who harbour evil thoughts of Allah.!1247! May ill-fate 
befall them! Allah is displeased with them. He has condemned them and 
prepared for them Hell. What an evil destination! 7. To Allah ‘alone’ belong 
the forces of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Almighty, All-Wise. 


The Prophet’s Duty 
8. Indeed, "O Prophet,’ We have sent you as a witness, a deliverer of good 
news, and a warner, 9. so that you "believers' may have faith in Allah and 
His Messenger, support and honour him, and glorify Allah moming and 
evening, !1048] 


Allegiance Under the Tree!12421. 
10. Surely those who pledge allegiance to you "O Prophet’ are actually 
pledging allegiance to Allah. Allah’s Hand is over theirs. Whoever breaks 
their pledge, it will only be to their own loss. And whoever fulfils their 
pledge to Allah, He will grant them a great reward. 


Fake Excuses for Not Travelling to Mecca 

11. The nomadic Arabs, who stayed behind, will say to you "O Prophet’, 
“We were preoccupied with our wealth and families, so ask for forgiveness 
for us.” They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, “Who 
then can stand between you and Allah in any way, if He intends harm or 
benefit for you? In fact, Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 12. The truth is: 
you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to 
their families again. And that was made appealing in your hearts. You 
harboured evil thoughts ‘about Allah’, and ‘so’ became a doomed people.” 
13. And whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, then We 
surely have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing Fire. 14. To Allah ‘alone’ 
belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whoever He 
wills, and punishes whoever He wills. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 


Shares in the Spoils of War 
15. Those who stayed behind will say, when you ‘believers’ set out to take 
the spoils of war, “Let us accompany you.” They wish to change Allah’s 


promise.!1059] Say, "O Prophet,’ “You will not accompany us. This is what 
Allah has said before.” They will then say, “In fact, you are driven by 
jealousy against us!”!105!! The truth is: they can hardly comprehend. 


A Second Chance 
16. Say to nomadic Arabs, who stayed behind, “You will be called ‘to fight’ 
against a people of great might,'2252! who you will fight unless they submit. 
If you then obey, Allah will grant you a fine reward. But if you turn away as 
you did before, He will inflict upon you a painful punishment.” 


Those Exempted from Fighting 
17. There is no blame on the blind, or the disabled, or the sick “for staying 
behind". And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger will be admitted by 
Him into Gardens under which rivers flow. But whoever turns away will be 
subjected by Him to a painful punishment. 


Allegiance of the Faithful 

18. Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they pledged 
allegiance to you "O Prophet’ under the tree. He knew what was in their 
hearts, so He sent down serenity upon them and rewarded them with a 
victory at hand,'4252! 19, and many spoils of war they will gain. For Allah is 
Almighty, All-Wise. 20. Allah has promised you ‘believers’ abundant 
spoils, which you will gain, so He hastened this "truce H®4 for you. And 
He has held people’s hands back from ‘harming’ you, so it may be a sign for 
the believers, and so He may guide you along the Straight Path. 21. And 
‘there are’ other gains which are beyond your reach that Allah is keeping in 
store "for you’. For Allah is Most Capable of everything. 


The Believers Will Prevail 
22. If the disbelievers were to fight you, they would certainly fle 
Then they would never find any protector or helper. 23. "This is* Allah’s 
way, already long established ‘in the past’. And you will find no change in 
Allah’s way. 


e, (1055) 


Wisdom Behind the Truce 
24. He is the One Who held back their hands from you and your hands from 
them in the valley of "Hudaibiyah, near’ Mecca, after giving you the upper 
hand over ‘a group of" them.!2056! And Allah is All-Seeing of what you do. 
25. They are the ones who persisted in disbelief and hindered you from the 


Sacred Mosque, preventing the sacrificial animals from reaching their 
destination.'4257] "We would have let you march through Mecca," had there 
not been believing men and women, unknown to you. You might have 
trampled them underfoot, incurring guilt for "what you did to’ them 
unknowingly. That was so Allah may admit into His mercy whoever He 
wills.!4958] Had those ‘unknown’ believers stood apart, We would have 
certainly inflicted a painful punishment on the disbelievers. 


Meccan Arrogance 
26. ‘Remember’ when the disbelievers had filled their hearts with pride— 
the pride of "pre-Islamic ignorance!!252)then Allah sent down His 
serenity upon His Messenger and the believers, inspiring them to uphold the 
declaration of faith, H2®! for they were better entitled and more worthy of it. 
And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


The Prophet's Vision 42%. 
27. Indeed, Allah will fulfil His Messenger’s vision in all truth: Allah 
willing, you will surely enter the Sacred Mosque, in security—'some with’ 
heads shaved and ‘others with" hair shortened—without fear.!1262] He knew 
what you did not know, so He first granted you the triumph at hand.!4283! 
28. He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with ‘right’ guidance and 
the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others. And sufficient is 
Allah as a Witness. 
Believers’ Description in the Torah and the Gospel 

29. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. And those with him are firm 
with the disbelievers!#26! and compassionate with one another. You see 
them bowing and prostrating!t®®3] "in prayer’, seeking Allah’s bounty and 
pleasure. The sign ‘of brightness can be seen’ on their faces from the trace 
of prostrating "in prayer’. This is their description in the Torah.'425°! And 
their parable in the Gospel is that of a seed that sprouts its ‘tiny’ branches, 
making it strong. Then it becomes thick, standing firmly on its stem, to the 
delight of the planters!+267!—in this way Allah makes the believers a source 
of dismay for the disbelievers.'4258! To those of them who believe and do 


good, Allah has promised forgiveness and a great reward. 
kkk 


49. The Private Quarters 
(Al- Hujurat) 


This Medinian sûrah, which takes its name from the reference to the 
Prophet’s private quarters in verse 4, instructs the believers on the proper 
conduct towards the Prophet (verses 1-5) and the social etiquette of dealing 
with other believers (verses 6-12) and the rest of humanity (verse 13). At the 
end of the stirah, the nomadic Arabs are taught that true faith is proven by 
action not only words. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Manners with the Prophet 1) Respect Authority 
1. O believers! Do not proceed ‘in any matter’ before ‘a decree from" Allah 
and His Messenger. And fear Allah. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All- 
Knowing. 


Manners with the Prophet 2) Watch Your Tongue 
2. O believers! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor 
speak loudly to him as you do to one another, !42%! or your deeds will 
become void while you are unaware. 3. Indeed, those who lower their 
voices in the presence of Allah’s Messenger are the ones whose hearts 
Allah has refined for righteousness. They will have forgiveness and a great 
reward. 
Manners with the Prophet 3) Respect Privacy 
4. Indeed, most of those who call out to you "O Prophet’ from outside ‘your’ 
private quarters have no understanding "of manners”.!1228! 5, Had they been 
patient until you could come out to them, it would have certainly been 
better for them. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 
Social Etiquette 1) Verifying News 

6. O believers, if an evildoer brings you any news, verify ‘it’ so you do not 
harm people unknowingly, becoming regretful for what you have done.! 1021) 
7. And keep in mind that Allah’s Messenger is ‘still’ in your midst. If he 
were to yield to you in many matters, you would surely suffer ‘the 
consequences”.!42721 But Allah has endeared faith to you, making it 


appealing in your hearts. And He has made disbelief, rebelliousness, and 
disobedience detestable to you. Those are the ones rightly guided. 8. “This 
is’ a bounty and a blessing from Allah. And Allah is All-Knowing, All- 
Wise. 


Social Etiquette 2) Sense of Brotherhood 

9. And if two groups of believers fight each other, then make peace between 
them. But if one of them transgresses against the other, then fight against 
the transgressing group until they ‘are willing to’ submit to the rule of 
Allah. If they do so, then make peace between both ‘groups’ in all fairness 
and act justly. Surely Allah loves those who uphold justice. 10. The 
believers are but one brotherhood, so make peace between your brothers. 
And be mindful of Allah so you may be shown mercy. 


Social Etiquette 3) Respect for All 

11. O believers! Do not let some ‘men’ ridicule others, they may be better 
than them, nor let ‘some’ women ridicule other women, they may be better 
than them. Do not defame one another, nor call each other by offensive 
nicknames. How evil it is to act rebelliously after having faith! And 
whoever does not repent, it is they who are the ‘true’ wrongdoers. 12. O 
believers! Avoid many suspicions, ‘for’ indeed, some suspicions are sinful. 
And do not spy, nor backbite one another. Would any of you like to eat the 
flesh of their dead brother? You would despise that!!4223! And fear Allah. 
Surely Allah is ‘the’ Accepter of Repentance, Most Merciful. 


Social Etiquette 4) Equality 
13. O humanity! Indeed, We created you from a male and a female, and 
made you into peoples and tribes so that you may ‘get to’ know one another. 
Surely the most noble of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous 
among you. Allah is truly All-Knowing, All-Aware.!10741 


Actions Speak Louder than Words 
14. "Some of" the nomadic Arabs say, “We believe.” Say, "O Prophet,’ “You 
have not believed. But say, ‘We have submitted,’ for faith has not yet 
entered your hearts.!4225! But if you obey Allah and His Messenger 
“wholeheartedly’, He will not discount anything from ‘the reward of’ your 
deeds. Allah is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” 15. The ‘true’ believers 
are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger—never doubting— 


and strive with their wealth and their lives in the cause of Allah. They are 
the ones true in faith. 16. Say, “Do you inform Allah of your faith, when 
Allah ‘already’ knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the 
earth? And Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things.” 17. They regard 
their acceptance of Islam as a favour to you. Tell ‘them, O Prophet’, “Do 
not regard your Islam as a favour to me. Rather, it is Allah Who has done 
you a favour by guiding you to the faith, if “indeed” you are faithful. 18. 
Surely Allah knows the unseen of the heavens and earth. And Allah is All- 
Seeing of what you do.” 
kkk 


50. Qaf 
(Qaf) 


Since the previous sûrah primarily addresses the believers, this sûrah 
mainly talks about the disbelievers—particularly the deniers of 
resurrection. References are made to earlier destroyed deniers and Allah’s 
infinite power to prove His ability to create and resurrect. The deniers of 
resuyregtion are told what to expect after death and judgment. The Prophet 
(-(#./;) is urged to be steadfast. The certainty of the Hereafter is 
rae asized both at the end of this strah and the beginning of the next. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Pagan Denial of Resurrection 

1. Qdf. By the glorious Quran! 2. "All will be resurrected,’ yet the deniers 
are astonished that a warner has come to them from among themselves 
“warning of resurrection’. So the disbelievers say, “This is an astonishing 
thing! 3. "Will we be returned to life,’ when we are dead and reduced to 
dust? Such a return is impossible.” 4. We certainly know what the earth 
consumes of them ‘after their death’, and with us is a well-preserved 
Record.!1226! 5, In fact, they reject the truth when it has come to them, so 
they are in a confused state,! 10721 


Allah’s Power to Create 

6. Have they not then looked at the sky above them: how We built it and 
adorned it "with stars’, leaving it flawless? 7. As for the earth, We spread it 
out and placed upon it firm mountains, and produced in it every type of 
pleasant plant— 8. ‘all as’ an insight and a reminder to every servant who 
turns "to Allah’. 9. And We send down blessed rain from the sky, bringing 
forth gardens and grains for harvest, 10. and towering palm trees ‘loaded’ 
with clustered fruit, 11. as’ a provision for "Our" servants. And with this 
‘rain’ We revive a lifeless land. Similar is the emergence “from the graves’. 


Deniers Before Arab Pagans 
12. Before them, the people of Noah denied ‘the truth,’ as did the people of 
the Water-pit,'1228] Thamûd, 13. ’Ad, Pharaoh, the kinfolk of Lot, 14. the 


residents of the Forest,!4272! and the people of Tubba’.!4289) Each rejected 
their’ messenger, so My warning was fulfilled. 


Allah’s Power to Resurrect and Know All 
15. Were We incapable of creating ‘them’ the first time? In fact, they are in 
doubt about ‘their’ re-creation. 16. Indeed, ‘it is‘ We ‘Who’ created 
humankind and ‘fully’ know what their souls whisper to them, and We are 
closer to them than ‘their’ jugular vein. 17. As the two recording-angels— 
one’ sitting to the right, and "the other to’ the left—note ‘everything’, 18. 
not a word does a person utter without having a ‘vigilant’ observer ready "to 


write it down’. (281! 


Bad News for the Deniers 

19. ‘Ultimately,’ with the throes of death will come the truth.!1282] This is 
what you were trying to escape! 20. And the Trumpet will be blown.!123! 
This is the Day "you were’ warned of. 21. Each soul will come forth with an 
angel to drive it and another to testify. 22. "It will be said to the denier,’ 
“You were totally heedless of this. Now We have lifted this veil of yours, so 
Today your sight is sharp!” 23. And one’s accompanying-angel will say, 
“Here is the record ready with me.” 24. "It will be said to both angels,’ 
“Throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever, 25. withholder of good, 
transgressor, and doubter, 26. who set up another god with Allah. So cast 
them into the severe punishment.” 


The Misleaders and the Misled 
27. One’s ‘devilish’ associate will say, “Our Lord! I did not make them 
transgress. Rather, they were far astray ‘on their own’.” 28. Allah will 
respond, “Do not dispute in My presence, since I had already given you a 
warning. 29. My Word cannot be changed,!1°84! nor am I unjust to "My" 
creation.” 30. ‘Beware of" the Day We will ask Hell, “Are you full “yet?” 
And it will respond, “Are there any more?” 


Good News for the Righteous 
31. And Paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far off. 32. "And 
it will be said to them,’ “This is what you were promised, for whoever 
‘constantly’ turned ‘to Allah’ and kept up "His commandments — 33. who 
were in awe of the Most Compassionate without seeing "Him’,!2285! and 
have come with a heart turning ‘only to Him’. 34. Enter it in peace. This is 


the Day of eternal life!” 35. There they will have whatever they desire, and 
with Us is ‘even’ more. !1286! 


Warning to Meccan Pagans 
36. ‘Imagine’ how many peoples We destroyed before them, who were far 
mightier than them. Then ‘when the torment came,’ they ‘desperately’ 
sought refuge in the land. "But’ was there any escape? 37. Surely in this is a 
reminder for whoever has a ‘mindful’ heart and lends an attentive ear. 


Did Allah Get Tired? 
38. Indeed, We created the heavens and the earth and everything in between 
in six Days,!4282] and We were not ‘even’ touched with fatigue.!1288! 39, So 
be patient "O Prophet’ with what they say. And glorify the praises of your 
Lord before sunrise and before sunset. 40. And glorify Him during part of 
the night!1289! and after the prayers. 


Reassuring the Prophet 
41. And listen! On the Day the caller will call out from a near place, 42. the 
Day all will hear the “mighty” Blast in “all” truth,'2%! that will be the Day 
of emergence ‘from the graves’. 43. It is certainly We Who give life and 
cause death. And to Us is the final return. 44. "Beware of" the Day the earth 
will split open, letting them rush forth. That will be an easy gathering for 
Us. 45. We know best what they say. And you "O Prophet’ are not ‘there’ to 
compel them ‘to believe’. So remind with the Quran ‘only’ those who fear 
My warning. 
kk 


51. Scattering Winds 
(AZ Zriyat) 


Like the previous stirah, this Meccan stirah makes the case for the 
Resurrection, citing some of Allah’s natural signs in the universe to prove 
His ability to bring the dead back life. Several examples are given of the 
deniers of judgment who were egigoyed, which contrast with the reward of 
the believers. The Prophet ( -{z-[;) is urged to carry on reminding. Both 
the end of this sûrah and the 6éginning of the next pose a warning of the 
Day of Judgment. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Judgment Is Inevitable 
1. By the winds scattering "dust’, 2. and ‘the clouds’ loaded with rain, 3. and 
‘the ships’ gliding with ease, 4. and ‘the angels’ administering affairs by 
“Allah’s’ command! 5. Indeed, what you are promised is true. 6. And the 
Judgment will certainly come to pass. 


Warning to the Deniers 

7. ‘And’ by the heavens in their marvellous design!!42%! 8. Surely you are 
lost” in conflicting views ‘regarding the truth’.!4292! 9, Only those “destined 
to be” deluded are turned away from it.'4293! 10, Condemned are the liars— 
11. those who are ‘steeped’ in ignorance, totally heedless. 12. They ask 
"mockingly’, “When is this Day of Judgment?” 13. "It is’ the Day they will 
be tormented over the Fire. 14. "They will be told,’ “Taste your torment! 
This is what you sought to hasten.” 


Good News for the Devout 
15. Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and springs, 16. "joyfully" 
receiving what their Lord will grant them. Before this ‘reward’ they were 
truly good-doers ‘in the world’: 17. they used to sleep only little in the 
night, 18. and pray for forgiveness before dawn.'2%! 19. And in their 
wealth there was a rightful share ‘fulfilled’ for the beggar and the poor. 


Allah’s Signs in Creation 


20. There are ‘countless’ signs on earth for those with sure faith, 21. as there 
are within yourselves. Can you not see? 22. In heaven is your sustenance 
and whatever you are promised. 23. Then by the Lord of heaven and earth! 
"All this is certainly as true as ‘the fact that’ you can speak! 


Abraham Visited by Angels 

24. Has the story of Abraham’s honoured guests reached you "O Prophet”? 
25. ‘Remember’ when they entered his presence and greeted ‘him with’, 
“Peace!” He replied, “Peace ‘be upon you"!” "Then he said to himself,’ 
“"These are’ an unfamiliar people.” 26. Then he slipped off to his family 
and brought a fat "roasted" calf,!4295! 27. and placed it before them, asking, 
“Will you not eat?” 28. "They did not eat,” so he grew fearful of them.!4096! 
They reassured ‘him’, “Do not be afraid,” and gave him good news of a 
knowledgeable son.!'12271 29. Then his wife came forward with a cry, 
clasping her forehead ‘in astonishment’, exclaiming, “A baby from" a 
barren, old woman!” 30. They replied, “Such has your Lord decreed. He is 
truly the All-Wise, All-Knowing.” 


Destruction of the People of Lot 

31. "Later,* Abraham asked, “What is your mission, O messengers?” 32. 
They replied, “We have actually been sent to a wicked people, 33. to send 
upon them stones of ‘baked’ clay, 34. marked by your Lord for the 
transgressors.” 35. Then "before the torment’ We evacuated the believers 
from the city. 36. But We only found one family that had submitted ‘to 
Allah’,!4098] 37, And We have left a sign there!1229! "as a lesson” for those 
who fear the painful punishment. 


Destruction of Pharaoh’s People 
38. And in ‘the story of’ Moses ‘was another lesson,’ when We sent him to 
Pharaoh with compelling proof, 39. but Pharaoh was carried away by his 
power, saying ‘of Moses’, “A magician or a madman!” 40. So We seized 


him and his soldiers, casting them into the sea while he was blameworthy. 
[1100] 


Destruction of the People of Hûd 
41. And in ‘the story of" ’ Âd ‘was another lesson,” when We sent against 
them the devastating wind." 42. There was nothing it came upon that it 
did not reduce to ashes. 


Destruction of the People of Salih 
43. And in "the story of’ Thamiid "was another lesson,’ when they were told, 
“Enjoy yourselves “only” for a ‘short’ while.” H822] 44, Still they persisted in 
defying the commands of their Lord, so they were overtaken by a ‘mighty’ 
blast while they were looking on. 45. Then they were not able to rise up, 
nor were they helped. 


Destruction of the People of Noah 
46. And the people of Noah ‘had also been destroyed’ earlier. They were 
truly a rebellious people. 


Allah’s Power of Creation 
47. We built the universe with ‘great’ might, and We are certainly 
expanding ‘it’. 48. As for the earth, We spread it out. How superbly did We 
smooth it out!!1203] 49, And We created pairs of all things!#!4! so perhaps 
you would be mindful. 


Wake-up Call to the Deniers 
50. So "proclaim, O Prophet’: “Flee to Allah! I am truly sent by Him with a 
clear warning to you. 51. And do not set up another god with Allah. I am 
truly sent by Him with a clear warning to you.” 


Earlier Deniers 
52. Similarly, no messenger came to those before them without being told: 
“A magician or a madman!” 53. Have they passed this ‘cliché* down to one 
another? In fact, they have ‘all’ been a transgressing people. 54. So ‘now’ 
turn away from them "O Prophet’, for you will not be blamed.!4425] 55. But 
“continue to’ remind. For certainly reminders benefit the believers. 


The Purpose of Life 
56. I did not create jinn and humans except to worship Me. 57. I seek no 
provision from them, nor do I need them to feed Me. 58. Indeed, Allah 
“alone” is the Supreme Provider—Lord of all Power, Ever Mighty. 


Warning to the Deniers 
59. The wrongdoers will certainly have a share ‘of the torment’ like that of 
their predecessors. So do not let them ask Me to hasten ‘it’. 60. Woe then to 
the disbelievers when they face their Day which they are warned of! 
kkk 


52. Mount Jur 
(AF Jur) 


This Meccan sirah takes its name from verse 1, where Allah swears by 
Mount Jur, among other things, that the Day of Judgment is inevitable. The 
punishment of those skeptical of judgment is described, followed by a 
detailed description of the reward of the believers along with their offspring 
(verse 7-28). Atheism is also rejected (verses 25-36). The Prophet 
(laí) is reassured of Allah’s support, while the pagan beliefs and 
iins are refuted both in this sûrah and the next. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Judgment Is the Truth 
1. By Mount Tar!!4205! 2, And by the Book written 3. on open pages "for all 
to read"!!1107] 4, And by the "Sacred" House frequently visited!!4128) 5. And 
by the canopy raised "high"! 6. And by the seas set on fire!!1129! 7, Indeed, 
the punishment of your Lord will come to pass— 8. none will avert it— 9. 
on the Day the heavens will be shaken violently, 10. and the mountains will 
be blown away entirely. 


Horrors Awaiting the Deniers 
11. Then woe on that Day to the deniers— 12. those who amuse themselves 
with falsehood! 13. "It is’ the Day they will be fiercely shoved into the Fire 
of Hell. 14. "They will be told,’ “This is the Fire which you used to deny. 
15. Is this magic, or do you not see? 16. Burn in it! It is the same whether 
you endure ‘it’ patiently or not.!40! You are only rewarded for what you 
used to do.” 


Pleasures Awaiting the Faithful 
17. Indeed, the righteous will be in Gardens and bliss, 18. enjoying 
whatever their Lord will have granted them. And their Lord will have 
protected them from the torment of the Hellfire. 19. "They will be told,’ 
“Eat and drink happily for what you used to do.” 20. They will be reclining 
on thrones, ‘neatly’ lined up “facing each other’. And We will pair them to 
maidens with gorgeous eyes. 21. As for those who believe and whose 


descendants follow them in faith, We will elevate their descendants to their 
rank, never discounting anything ‘of the reward’ of their deeds. Every 
person will reap only what they sowed." 22. And We will ‘continually’ 
provide them with whatever fruit or meat they desire. 23. They will pass 
around to each other a drink ‘of pure wine,’ which leads to no idle talk or 
sinfulness. 24. And they will be waited on by their youthful servants like 
spotless pearls. 


Remembering Past Lives in Paradise 
25. They will turn to one another inquisitively.!42! 26. They will say, 
“Before ‘this reward’ we used to be in awe ‘of Allah’ in the midst of our 
people. 27. So Allah has graced us and protected us from the torment of 
"Hell’s’ scorching heat. 28. Indeed, we used to call upon Him ‘alone’ before. 
He is truly the Most Kind, Most Merciful.” 


Why Do Meccans Deny the Truth? 

29. So ‘continue to` remind ‘all, O Prophet’. For you, by the grace of your 
Lord, are not a fortune-teller or a madman. 30. Or do they say, “He is’ a 
poet, for whom we ‘eagerly’ await an ill-fate!”? 31. Say, “Keep waiting! I 
too am waiting with you.” 32. Or do their ‘intelligent’ minds prompt them 
to this "paradox”?!413! Or are they ‘just’ a transgressing people? 33. Or do 
they say, “He made this ‘Quran’ up!”? In fact, they have no faith. 34. Let 
them then produce something like it, if what they say is true!!444! 35. Or 
were they created by nothing, or are they ‘their own’ creators? 36. Or did 
they create the heavens and the earth? In fact, they have no firm belief ‘in 
Allah’. 37. Or do they possess the treasuries of your Lord, or are they in 
control ‘of everything’? 38. Or do they have a stairway, by which they 
eavesdrop ‘on the heavens’? Then let those who do so bring a compelling 
proof. 39. Or does He have daughters ‘as you claim’, while you ‘prefer to’ 
have sons?!15! 40, Or are you "O Prophet” asking them for a reward "for 
the message’ so that they are overburdened by debt? 41. Or do they have 
access to ‘the Record in’ the unseen, so they copy it ‘for all to see’? 42. Or 
do they intend to scheme ‘against the Prophet’? Then it is the disbelievers 
who will fall victim to ‘their’ schemes. 43. Or do they have a god other than 
Allah? Glorified is Allah far above what they associate "with Him"! 


Reassuring the Prophet 


44. If they were to see a ‘deadly’ piece of the sky fall down ‘upon them’, 
still they would say, “This is just’ a pile of clouds.” 45. So leave them until 
they face their Day in which they will be struck dead— 46. the Day their 
scheming will be of no benefit to them whatsoever, nor will they be helped. 
47. Also, the wrongdoers will certainly have another torment before that 
"Day", but most of them do not know.!44/6! 48. So be patient with your 
Lord’s decree, for you are truly under Our ‘watchful’ Eyes. And glorify the 
praises of your Lord when you rise. 49. And glorify Him during part of the 
night and at the fading of the stars. 
kkk 


53. The Stars 
(An-Najm) 


This Meccan sûrah takes its name from the reference to the fading of the 
stars in the first verse (as well as the last verse of the previous stirah). The 
divine source of the Prophet’s message is emphasized, followed by reference 
to his ascension to heaven during the Night Journey (see the introduction to 
Sirah 17). The pagans are condemned for associating idols with Allah in 
worship and for claiming that the angels are Allah’s daughters. 
Manifestations of Allah’s infinite power are cited to prove His ability to 
resurrect. Both the end of this sûrah and the beginning of the next stress the 
imminence of the Hour. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Prophet’s Encounter with Gabriel 
1. By the stars when they fade away! 2. Your fellow man'4#Z! is neither 
misguided nor astray. 3. Nor does he speak of his own whims. 4. It is only a 
revelation sent down ‘to him’. 5. He has been taught by one ‘angel’ of 
mighty power'4/8! 6. and great perfection, who once rose to “his” true 
form H91 7, while on the highest point above the horizon, 8. then he 
approached ‘the Prophet’, coming so close 9. that he was only two arms- 
lengths away or even less.!4!22! 10. Then Allah revealed to His servant what 
He revealed ‘through Gabriel’. 11. The ‘Prophet’s* heart did not doubt what 
he saw. 12. How can you "O pagans’ then dispute with him regarding what 
he saw? 13. And he certainly saw that ‘angel descend’ a second time 14. at 
the Lote Tree of the most extreme limit ‘in the seventh heaven’— 15. near 
which is the Garden of Eternal’ Residence— 16. while the Lote Tree was 
overwhelmed with ‘heavenly’ splendours! 17. The "Prophet’s’ sight never 
wandered, nor did it overreach. 18. He certainly saw some of his Lord’s 
greatest signs. 121 
Wake-up Call to Pagans 


19. Now, have you considered ‘the idols of* Lat and ’Uzza, 20. and the third 
one, Manat, as well? 21. Do you ‘prefer to` have sons while ‘you attribute’ 


to Him daughters?!#!22! 22. Then this is “truly” a biased distribution! 23. 
These ‘idols’ are mere names that you and your forefathers have made 
up!41231__a practice Allah has never authorized. They follow nothing but 
inherited’ assumptions and whatever ‘their’ souls desire, although ‘true’ 
guidance has already come to them from their Lord. 24. Or should every 
person "simply" have whatever ‘intercessors" they desire?!4124! 25. In fact, to 
Allah ‘alone’ belongs this world and the next. 26. ‘Imagine’ how many 
‘noble’ angels are in the heavens! ‘Even’ their intercession would be of no 
benefit whatsoever, until Allah gives permission to whoever He wills and 
“only for the people He’ approves. 


Are Angels Allah’s Daughters? 
27. Indeed, those who do not believe in the Hereafter label angels as 
female, 28. although they have no knowledge ‘in support’ of this. They 
follow nothing but ‘inherited’ assumptions. And surely assumptions can in 
no way replace the truth. 29. So turn away "O Prophet’ from whoever has 
shunned Our Reminder,'#25! only seeking the “fleeting” life of this world. 
30. This is the extent of their knowledge. Surely your Lord knows best who 
has strayed from His Way and who is ‘rightly’ guided. 


Allah Knows Who Is Righteous 

31. To Allah ‘alone’ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on 
the earth so that He may reward the evildoers according to what they did, 
and reward the good-doers with the finest reward!4!26!— 32. those who 
avoid major sins and shameful deeds, despite ‘stumbling on’ minor sins. 
Surely your Lord is infinite in forgiveness. He knew well what would 
become of you as He created you from the earth!22! and while you were 
“still” fetuses in the wombs of your mothers.!+!28! So do not ‘falsely’ elevate 
yourselves. He knows best who is ‘truly’ righteous. 


The One Who Returned to Disbelief #231 
33. Have you seen the one who turned away ‘from Islam,’ 34. and ‘initially’ 
paid a little ‘for his salvation’, and then stopped? 35. Does he have the 
knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ‘the Hereafter’? 36. Or has he not 
been informed of what is in the Scripture of Moses, 37. and ‘that of’ 
Abraham, who ‘perfectly’ fulfilled "his covenant’? 38. "They state’ that no 
soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another, 39. and that each 


person will only have what they endeavoured towards, 40. and that ‘the 
outcome of’ their endeavours will be seen ‘in their record’, 41. then they 
will be fully rewarded, 42. and that to your Lord ‘alone’ is the ultimate 
return ‘of all things’. 


It Is All in Allah’s Hands 

43. Moreover, He is the One Who brings about joy and sadness.!1130! 44, 
And He is the One Who gives life and causes death. 45. And He created the 
pairs—males and females— 46. from a sperm-drop when it is emitted. 47. 
And it is upon Him to bring about re-creation. 48. And He is the One Who 
enriches and impoverishes. 49. And He alone is the Lord of Sirius.'4424! 50. 
And He destroyed the first "people of’ ’Ad, 51. and “then” Thamiid,!4422! 
Sparing no one. 52. And before ‘that He destroyed’ the people of Noah, who 
were truly far worse in wrongdoing and transgression. 53. And ‘it was’ He 
"Who' turned the cities "of Sodom and Gomorrah’ upside down. 54. How 
overwhelming was what covered ‘them”!!4423! 55. Now, which of your 
Lord’s favours will you dispute? 


Warning to Arab Pagans 
56. This "Prophet’ is a warner like earlier ones. 57. The approaching ‘Hour’ 
has drawn near. 58. None but Allah can disclose it. 59. Do you find this 
revelation astonishing, 60. laughing ‘at it’ and not weeping ‘in awe’, 61. 
while persisting in heedlessness? 62. Instead, prostrate to Allah and worship 
"Him alone’! 
kkk 


54. The Moon 
(Al-Qamar) 


This Meccan sûrah, which takes its name from the splitting of the moon 
mentioned in verse 1, criticizes the disbelievers for rejecting warnings of 
the fast-approaching Hour. The pagans are warned of a dreadful fate 
similar to that of earlier disbelievers, who were mentioned passingly in the 
previous sûrah (53:50-54). The sûrah concludes by announcing that the 
righteous will be honoured in the presence of the Almighty, which is the 
highlight of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to Meccan Deniers 
1. The Hour has drawn near and the moon was split "in two”.!4424! 2, Yet, 
whenever they see a sign, they turn away, 1135] saying, “Same old magic!” 
3. They rejected ‘the truth’ and followed their own desires—and every 
matter will be settled— 4. even though the stories ‘of destroyed nations’ 
that have already come to them are a sufficient deterrent. 5. "This Quran is’ 
profound ‘in’ wisdom, but warnings are of no benefit ‘to them’. 6. So turn 
away from them "O Prophet’. "And wait for’ the Day "when" the caller!4/25! 
will summon ‘them’ for something horrifying. H71 7. With eyes downcast, 
they will come forth from the graves as if they were swarming locusts, 8. 
rushing towards the caller. The disbelievers will cry, “This is a difficult 
Day!” 
The People of Noah 

9. Before them, the people of Noah denied ‘the truth’ and rejected Our 
servant, calling "him’ insane. And he was intimidated. 10. So he cried out to 
his Lord, “I am helpless, so help "me'!” 11. So We opened the gates of the 
sky with pouring rain, 12. and caused the earth to burst with springs, so the 
waters met for a fate already set. 13. We carried him on that "Ark made’ of 
planks and nails, 14. sailing under Our ‘watchful’ Eyes—a ‘fair’ punishment 
on behalf of the one ‘they" denied. 15. We certainly left this!4438! as a sign. 
So is there anyone who will be mindful? 16. Then how ‘dreadful’ were My 


punishment and warnings! 17. And We have certainly made the Quran easy 
to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful? 


The People of Htid 
18. Ad ‘also’ rejected ‘the truth’. Then how ‘dreadful’ were My punishment 
and warnings! 19. Indeed, We sent against them a furious wind,!#22! on a 
day of unrelenting misery, 20. that snatched people up, leaving them like 
trunks of uprooted palm trees. 21. Then how ‘dreadful’ were My 
punishment and warnings! 22. And We have certainly made the Quran easy 
to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful? 


The People of Salih 

23. Thamiid rejected the warnings ‘as well’, 24. arguing, “How can we 
follow one ‘average’ human being from among us? We would then truly be 
misguided and insane. 25. Has the revelation been sent down ‘only’ to him 
out of ‘all of' us? In fact, he is a boastful liar.” 26. "It was revealed to 
Salih,’ “They will soon know who the boastful liar is. 27. We are sending 
the she-camel as a test for them. So watch them ‘closely’, and have 
patience. 28. And tell them that the ‘drinking’ water must be divided 
between them ‘and her’, each taking a turn to drink ‘every other day’.” 29. 
But they roused a companion of theirs, so he dared to kill ‘her’. 30. Then 
how ‘dreadful’ were My punishment and warnings! 31. Indeed, We sent 
against them ‘only’ one ‘mighty’ blast, leaving them like the twigs of fence- 
builders. 32. And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So 
is there anyone who will be mindful? 


The People of Lot 
33. The people of Lot ‘also’ rejected the warnings. 34. We unleashed upon 
them a storm of stones. As for "the believers of’ Lot’s family, We delivered 
them before dawn 35. as a blessing from Us. This is how We reward 
whoever gives thanks. 36. He had already warned them of Our ‘crushing’ 
blow but they disputed the wamings. 37. And they even demanded his 
angel-guests from him,'4“2! so We blinded their eyes. "And they were told,” 
“Taste then My punishment and warnings!” 38. And indeed, by the early 
morning they were overwhelmed by an unrelenting torment. 39. ‘Again 
they were told,’ “Taste now My punishment and warnings!” 40. And We 


have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who 
will be mindful? 


The People of Pharaoh 
41. And indeed, the warnings ‘also’ came to the people of Pharaoh. 42. 
"But" they rejected all of Our signs, so We seized them with the ‘crushing" 
grip of the Almighty, Most Powerful. 


Warning to Pagan Deniers 
43. Now, are you ‘Meccan’ disbelievers superior to those ‘destroyed 
peoples’? Or have you ‘been granted’ immunity ‘from punishment’ in divine 
Books? 44. Or do they say, “We are all ‘a’ united ‘front’, bound to prevail.”? 
45. ‘Soon’ their united front will be defeated and ‘forced to’ flee.!414"! 46. 
Better yet, the Hour is their appointed time—and the Hour will be most 
catastrophic and most bitter. 47. Indeed, the wicked are ‘entrenched’ in 
misguidance, and ‘are bound for’ blazes. 48. On the Day they will be 
dragged into the Fire on their faces, "they will be told,’ “Taste the touch of 
Hell!”!4142] 49, Indeed, We have created everything, perfectly preordained. 
50. Our command!4442! is but a single word,'44! done in the blink of an 
eye. 51. We have already destroyed the likes of you. So will any ‘of you" be 
mindful? 52. Everything they have done is ‘listed’ in ‘their’ records. 53. 
Every matter, small and large, is written "precisely’. 

Reward of the Righteous 
54. Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and rivers,'#45! 55. at the 


Seat of Honour in the presence of the Most Powerful Sovereign. 
2k 2k 2k 


55. The Most Compassionate 
(Ar-Rahman) 


This Meccan surah is a call to humans and jinn to acknowledge Allah’s 
infinite blessings, hence the recurring question: “Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny?” which is repeated thirty-one times. Life on 
earth will come to an end, ushering in the Day of Judgment, where people 
will be classified into three groups based on their deeds and consequent 
rewards: the disbelievers (verses 31-45), the best of the believers (verses 
46-61), and the average believers (verses 62-78). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Favours: 1) Speech 
1. The Most Compassionate 2. taught the Quran, 3. created humanity, 4. 
and’ taught them speech. 


Favour 2) The Universe 
5. The sun and the moon ‘travel’ with precision. 6. The stars and the trees 
bow down "in submission”. H48] 7. As for the sky, He raised it "high’, and 
set the balance ‘of justice’ 8. so that you do not defraud the scales. 9. Weigh 
with justice, and do not give short measure. 


Favour 3) Provisions 
10. He laid out the earth for all beings. 11. In it are fruit, palm trees with 
date stalks, 12. and grain with husks, and aromatic plants. 13. Then which 
of your Lord’s favours will you "humans and jinn” both deny?!4142! 


Favour 4) Humans and Jinn 
14. He created humankind from ‘sounding’ clay like pottery, 15. and created 
jinn from a ‘smokeless’ flame of fire. 16. Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny? 

Favour 5) Natural Marvels 
17. "He is" Lord of the two easts and the two wests.!#48! 18. Then which of 


your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 19. He merges the two bodies of 
"fresh and salt’ water, 20. yet between them is a barrier they never cross. 


[1149] 21. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 22. Out of 
both ‘waters’ come forth pearls and coral. 23. Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny? 24. To Him belong the ships with raised sails, 
sailing through the seas like mountains. 25. Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny? 


Only Allah Is Eternal 
26. Every being on earth is bound to perish. 27. Only your Lord Himself, 
[1150] full of Majesty and Honour, will remain "forever. 28. Then 
which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 


All Stand In Need of Allah 
29. All those in the heavens and the earth are dependent on Him. Day in and 
day out He has something to bring about.!4452! 30. Then which of your 
Lord’s favours will you both deny? 


Punishment of the People of the Left!+453! 
31. We will soon attend to you ‘for judgment’, O two multitudes ‘of jinn 
and humans"! 32. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 
33. O assembly of jinn and humans! If you can penetrate beyond the realms 
of the heavens and the earth, then do so. "But’ you cannot do that without 
‘Our’ authority. 34. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 
35. Flames of fire and "molten" copper will be sent against you, and you 
will not be able to defend one another. 36. Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny? 37. "How horrible will it be’ when the heavens 
will split apart, becoming rose-red like ‘burnt’ oil! 38. Then which of your 
Lord’s favours will you both deny? 39. On that Day there will be no need 
for any human or jinn to be asked about their sins.!1454! 40. Then which of 
your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 41. The wicked will be recognized 
by their appearance, then will be seized by ‘their’ forelocks and feet. 42. 
Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 43. "They will be 
told,’ “This is the Hell which the wicked denied.” 44. They will alternate 
between its flames and scalding water. 45. Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny?!4155! 
Reward of the Foremost Believers 


46. And whoever is in awe of standing before their Lord will have two 
Gardens. 47. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 48. 


"Both will be’ with lush branches. 49. Then which of your Lord’s favours 
will you both deny? 50. In each ‘Garden’ will be two flowing springs. 51. 
Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 52. In each will be 
two types of every fruit. 53. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you 
both deny? 54. Those ‘believers’ will recline on furnishings lined with rich 
brocade. And the fruit of both Gardens will hang within reach. 55. Then 
which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 56. In both ‘Gardens’ will 
be maidens of modest gaze, who no human or jinn has ever touched before. 
57. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 58. Those 
"maidens" will be ‘as elegant’ as rubies and coral. 59. Then which of your 
Lord’s favours will you both deny? 60. Is there any reward for goodness 
except goodness? 61. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both 
deny? 
Reward of the People of the Right 
62. And below these two ‘Gardens’ will be two others. 63. Then which of 
your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 64. Both will be dark green. 65. 
Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 66. In each will be 
two gushing springs. 67. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both 
deny? 68. In both will be fruit, palm trees, and pomegranates. 69. Then 
which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 70. In all Gardens will be 
noble, pleasant mates. 71. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both 
deny? 72. ‘They will be’ maidens with gorgeous eyes, reserved in pavilions. 
73. Then which of your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 74. No human 
or jinn has ever touched these "maidens" before.!#455! 75. Then which of 
your Lord’s favours will you both deny? 76. All ‘believers’ will be reclining 
on green cushions and splendid carpets. 77. Then which of your Lord’s 
favours will you both deny? 78. Blessed is the Name of your Lord, full of 
Majesty and Honour. 
kkk 


56. The Inevitable Event 
(Al- Wagqi’ah) 


This Meccan sirah is identical to the previous one in classifying people into 
three groups on Judgment Day and discussing how Allah’s blessings are 
taken for granted. These blessings should be seen as a proof of His ability 
to raise the dead for judgment. Moreover, references are made to the 
creation of the human race, the divine nature of the Quran, and the horrors 
of the apocalypse. Allah is glorified in the last verse of this sûrah and the 
first verse of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Three Groups on Judgment Day H27 


1. When the Inevitable Event takes place, 2. then no one can deny it has 
come. 3. It will debase “some” and elevate “others’.!4458! 4, When the earth 
will be violently shaken, 5. and the mountains will be crushed to pieces, 6. 
becoming scattered ‘particles of’ dust, 7. you will ‘all’ be ‘divided into’ 
three groups: 8. the people of the right, how ‘blessed’ will they be; 9. the 
people of the left, how ‘miserable’ will they be; 10. and the foremost ‘in 
faith’ will be the foremost ‘in Paradise’. 


1) The Foremost 

11. They are the ones nearest ‘to Allah’, 12. in the Gardens of Bliss. 13. 
"They will be’ a multitude from earlier generations 14. and a few from later 
generations. 15. "All will be’ on jewelled thrones, 16. reclining face to face. 
17. They will be waited on by eternal youths 18. with cups, pitchers, and a 
drink ‘of pure wine’ from a flowing stream, 19. that will cause them neither 
headache nor intoxication. 20. "They will also be served’ any fruit they 
choose 21. and meat from any bird they desire. 22. And ‘they will have’ 
maidens with gorgeous eyes, 23. like pristine pearls, 24. ‘all’ as a reward for 
what they used to do. 25. There they will never hear any idle or sinful talk 
— 26. only good and virtuous speech.!129! 


2) People of the Right 


27. And the people of the right—how ‘blessed’ will they be! 28. "They will 
be’ amid thornless lote trees, 29. clusters of bananas, 30. extended shade, 
31. flowing water, 32. abundant fruit— 33. never out of season nor 
forbidden— 34. and elevated furnishings. 35. Indeed, We will have 
perfectly created their mates, 36. making them virgins, 37. loving and of 
equal age, 38. for the people of the right, 39. ‘who will be’ a multitude from 
earlier generations 40. and a multitude from later generations. 


3) People of the Left 

41. And the people of the left—how ‘miserable’ will they be! 42. "They will 
be’ in scorching heat and boiling water, 43. in the shade of black smoke, 44. 
neither cool nor refreshing. 45. Indeed, before this "torment’ they were 
spoiled by luxury, 46. and persisted in the worst of sin.!H®! 47, They used 
to ask “mockingly”, “When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will 
we really be resurrected? 48. And our forefathers as well?” 49. Say, "O 
Prophet,’ “Most certainly, earlier and later generations 50. will surely be 
gathered ‘together’ for the appointed Day. 51. Then you, O misguided 
deniers, 52. will certainly eat from ‘the fruit of’ the trees of Zaqqûm,! #61 
53. filling up ‘your’ bellies with it. 54. Then on top of that you will drink 
boiling water— 55. and you will drink ‘it’ like thirsty camels do.” 56. This 
will be their accommodation on the Day of Judgment. 


Allah’s Power: 1) Creating Humans 
57. It is We Who created you. Will you not then believe ‘in resurrection"? 
58. Have you considered what you ejaculate? 59. Is it you who create ‘a 
child out of" it, or is it We Who do so? 60. We have ordained death for ‘all 
of’ you, and We cannot be prevented 61. from transforming and recreating 
you in forms unknown to you. 62. You already know how you were first 
created. Will you not then be mindful? 
2) Causing Plants to Grow 

63. Have you considered what you sow? 64. Is it you who cause it to grow, 
or is it We Who do so? 65. If We willed, We could simply reduce this 
‘harvest’ to chaff, leaving you to lament, 66. “We have truly suffered a 
great’ loss. 67. In fact, we have been deprived ‘of our livelihood’.” 


3) Bringing Rain down 


68. Have you considered the water you drink? 69. Is it you who bring it 
down from the clouds, or is it We Who do so? 70. If We willed, We could 
make it salty. Will you not then give thanks? 


4) Producing Fire from Trees 
71. Have you considered the fire you kindle?!®2! 72. Is it you who produce 
its trees, or is it We Who do so? 73. We have made it ‘as’ a reminder ‘of the 
Hellfire’ and a provision for the travellers. 74. So glorify the Name of your 
Lord, the Greatest. 


Message to Quran Deniers 
75. So I do swear by the positions of the stars— 76. and this, if only you 
knew, is indeed a great oath— 77. that this is truly a noble Quran, 78. in a 
well-preserved Record,'!#463! 79. touched by none except the purified 
"angels™.!H64 80. "It is’ a revelation from the Lord of all worlds. 81. How 
can you then take this message lightly, 82. and repay ‘Allah for’ your 
provisions with denial?!4165! 


A Challenge to Deniers of the Hereafter 
83. Why then ‘are you helpless’ when the soul ‘of a dying person’ reaches 
‘their’ throat, 84. while you are looking on? 85. And We are nearer to such a 
person than you, but you cannot see. 86. Now, if you are not subject to Our 
Will ‘as you claim’, 87. bring that soul back, if what you say is true. 


Which of the Three Will You Be? 
88. So, if the deceased is one of those brought near ‘to Us’, 89. then “such a 
person will have’ serenity, fragrance, |4166] and a Garden of Bliss. 90. And if 
the deceased is one of the people of the right, 91. then ‘they will be told,’ 
“Greetings to you from the people of the right.” 92. But if such person is 
one of the misguided deniers, 93. then their accommodation will be boiling 
water ‘to drink’ 94. and burning in Hellfire. 95. Indeed, this is the absolute 
truth. 96. So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Greatest. 
kk 


57. Iron 
(Al- Hadid) 


This Medinian sûrah, which takes its name from the reference to iron in 
verse 25, is an invitation to strive in Allah’s cause and spend in His Way. 
Similar to the next sûrah, a strong emphasis is placed on Allah’s knowledge 
and power. It is made clear that Allah is able to revive faith in the hearts of 
the believers just as He can revive the earth after its death. The believers 
are advised regarding destiny and the life of this world, while the hypocrites 
are warned of the evil fate awaiting them. Some prophets are mentioned 
passingly before making a final inyjtgigon to the People of the Book to 
believe in Allah and His Prophet ( Ae) 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Knowledge and Might 
1. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah, for He is the 
Almighty, All-Wise. 2. To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the 
earth. He gives life and causes death. And He is Most Capable of 
everything. 3. He is the First and the Last, the Most High and Most Near, 
[1167] and He has "perfect" knowledge of all things. 4. He is the One Who 
created the heavens and the earth in six Days, £8] then established Himself 
on the Throne. He knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes 
out of it, and whatever descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it. 
And He is with you wherever you are.!+/69! For Allah is All-Seeing of what 
you do. 5. To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And 
to Allah all matters are returned. 6. He merges the night into day and the 
day into night. And He knows best what is ‘hidden’ in the heart. 
Believe and Support Allah’s Cause 

7. Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and donate from what He has 
entrusted you with. So those of you who believe and donate will have a 
mighty reward. 


Why Do You Not Believe? 


8. Why do you not believe in Allah while the Messenger is inviting you to 
have faith in your Lord, although He has already taken your covenant,! H20] 
if you will ever believe. 9. He is the One Who sends down clear revelations 
to His servant to bring you out of darkness and into light. For indeed Allah 
is Ever Gracious and Most Merciful to you. 


Why Do You Not Donate? 
10. And why should you not spend in the cause of Allah, while Allah is the 
‘sole’ inheritor of the heavens and the earth? Those of you who donated and 
fought before the victory ‘over Mecca’ are unparalleled. They are far 
greater in rank than those who donated and fought afterwards.'24! Yet 
Allah has promised each a fine reward. And Allah is All-Aware of what you 
do. 


A Generous Reward for the Generous 
11. Who is it that will lend to Allah a good loan which Allah will multiply 
"many times over” for them, and they will have an honourable reward?!1Z2! 
12. On that Day you will see believing men and women with their light 
shining ahead of them and on their right. "They will be told,’ “Today you 
have good news of Gardens, under which rivers flow, ‘for you’ to stay in 
forever. This is ‘truly’ the ultimate triumph.” 


The Hypocrites Entrenched in Darkness 

13. On that Day hypocrite men and women will beg the believers, “Wait for 
us so that we may have some of your light.” It will be said ‘mockingly’, 
“Go back "to the world’ and seek a light ‘there’!” Then a ‘separating’ wall 
with a gate will be erected between them. On the near side will be grace and 
on the far side will be torment.'4/2!! 14, The tormented will cry out to those 
graced, “Were we not with you?” They will reply, “Yes ‘you were’. But you 
chose to be tempted "by hypocrisy’, ‘eagerly’ awaited “our demise’, doubted 
‘the truth’, and were deluded by false hopes until Allah’s decree ‘of your 
death” came to pass. And "so` the Chief Deceiver! 7# deceived you about 
Allah. 15. So Today no ransom will be accepted from you ‘hypocrites’, nor 
from the disbelievers. Your home is the Fire—it is the ‘only’ fitting place 
for you. What an evil destination!” 


Hardened Hearts 


16. Has the time not yet come for believers’ hearts to be humbled at the 
remembrance of Allah and what has been revealed of the truth, and not be 
like those given the Scripture before—'those’ who were spoiled for so long 
that their hearts became hardened. And many of them are ‘still’ rebellious. 
17. Know that Allah revives the earth after its death.!125! We have certainly 
made the signs clear for you so perhaps you will understand. 


Reward of the Faithful 

18. Indeed, those men and women who give in charity and lend to Allah a 
good loan will have it multiplied for them, and they will have an 
honourable reward.! H78] 19, "As for" those who believe in Allah and His 
messengers, it is they who are ‘truly’ the people of truth. And the martyrs, 
with their Lord, will have their reward and their light. But ‘as for’ those 
who disbelieve and reject Our signs, it is they who will be the residents of 
the Hellfire. 


Fleeting Life vs. Eternal Life 

20. Know that this worldly life is no more than play, amusement, luxury, 
mutual boasting, and competition in wealth and children. This is like rain 
that causes plants to grow, to the delight of the planters. But later the plants 
dry up and you see them wither, then they are reduced to chaff. And in the 
Hereafter there will be either severe punishment or forgiveness and pleasure 
of Allah, whereas the life of this world is no more than the delusion of 
enjoyment. 21. ‘So’ compete with one another for forgiveness from your 
Lord and a Paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those 
who believe in Allah and His messengers. This is the favour of Allah. He 
grants it to whoever He wills. And Allah is the Lord of infinite bounty. 


Everything Is Destined 

22. No calamity ‘or blessing’ occurs on earth or in yourselves without being 
"written" in a Record before We bring it into being. This is certainly easy for 
Allah. 23. "We let you know this’ so that you neither grieve over what you 
have missed nor boast over what He has granted you. For Allah does not 
like whoever is arrogant, boastful— 24. those who are stingy and promote 
stinginess among people. And whoever turns away ‘should know that’ 
Allah ‘alone’ is truly the Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy. 


Prophets and Justice 


25. Indeed, We sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and with them We 
sent down the Scripture and the balance ‘of justice’ so that people may 
administer justice. And We sent down iron with its great might, benefits for 
humanity, and means for Allah to prove who ‘is willing to’ stand up for Him 
and His messengers without seeing Him. Surely Allah is All-Powerful, 
Almighty. 
Noah and Abraham 

26. And indeed, We sent Noah and Abraham and reserved prophethood and 
revelation for their descendants. Some of them are ‘rightly’ guided, while 
most are rebellious. 


Jesus and His Followers 
27. Then in the footsteps of these ‘prophets’, We sent Our messengers, and 
“after them’ We sent Jesus, son of Mary, and granted him the Gospel, and 
instilled compassion and mercy into the hearts of his followers. As for 
monasticism, they made it up—We never ordained it for them—only 
seeking to please Allah, yet they did not ‘even’ observe it strictly. So We 
rewarded those of them who were faithful. But most of them are rebellious. 


An Appeal to Jews and Christians 
28. O people of faith! Fear Allah and believe in His Messenger. ‘And’ He 
will grant you a double share of His mercy, provide you with a light to walk 
in ‘on Judgment Day’, and forgive you. For Allah is All-Forgiving, Most 
Merciful. 29. "This is so’ that the People of the Book ‘who deny the 
Prophet’ may know that they do not have any control over Allah’s grace, 
and that all grace is in Allah’s Hands. He grants it to whoever He wills. For 
Allah is the Lord of infinite bounty. 
kkk 


58. The Pleading Woman 
(Al-Mujadilah) 


A companion named Khawlah bint Tha’labah had a disagreement with her 
husband, Aws ibn AS-Samit, who then told her that she was as unlawful for 
him as the Zahr (back) of his mother. This statement had been considered to 
be a form ofidlyorce (known as Zihar) in Arabja{ Khawlah came to the 
Prophet ( Jf to ask for his opinion. He ( ee her that he had 
not recite revelation in this regard, on AEE based on tradition, she 
was divorced. She argued that she and her husband had children together 
who would suffer if their payus were separated. Then she started to plead 
to Allah as the Prophet ( -(z-[;) repeated the same answer. Eventually, this 
Medinian sûrah was ea in response to her pleas, thereby abolishing 
this ancient practice. The sûrah emphasizes Allah’s infinite knowledge and 
overwhelming power, and makes it clear that those who ally themselves 
with Allah and comply with His orders are bound to prevail, whereas those 
who challenge Him and ally themselves with His enemies will be debased 
and vanquished. This concept is elaborated upon in the next sûrah (verses 
59:1-4 and 11-17). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Case of Khawlah 
1. Indeed, Allah has heard the argument of the woman who pleaded with 
you "O Prophet’ concerning her husband, and appealed to Allah. Allah has 
heard your exchange. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. 


The Ruling on Zihâr 
2. Those of you who ‘sinfully’ divorce their wives by comparing them to 
their mothers ‘should know that’ their wives are in no way their mothers. 
None can be their mothers except those who gave birth to them. What they 
say is certainly detestable and false. Yet Allah is truly Ever-Pardoning, All- 
Forgiving. 3. Those who divorce their wives in this manner, then ‘wish to’ 
retract what they said, must free a slave before they touch each other. This 
"penalty’ is meant to deter you. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 4. 


But if the husband cannot afford this, let him then fast two consecutive 
months before the couple touch each other. But if he is unable ‘to fast’, then 
let him feed sixty poor people. This is to re-affirm your faith in Allah and 
His Messenger. These are the limits set by Allah. And the disbelievers will 
suffer a painful punishment. 


Fate of the Defiant 
5. Indeed, those who defy Allah and His Messenger will be debased, just 
like those before them. We have certainly sent down clear revelations. And 
the disbelievers will suffer a humiliating punishment. 6. On the Day Allah 
resurrects them all together, He will then inform them of what they have 
done. Allah has kept account of it all, while they have forgotten it. For 
Allah is a Witness over all things. 


Allah’s Infinite Knowledge 
7. Do you not see that Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever 
is on the earth? If three converse privately, He is their fourth. If five, He is 
their sixth. Whether fewer or more, He is with them!!! wherever they 
may be. Then, on the Day of Judgment, He will inform them of what they 
have done. Surely Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 


Evil, Secret Talks 
8. Have you not seen those who were forbidden from secret talks, yet they 
‘always’ return to what they were forbidden from, conspiring in sin, 
aggression, and disobedience to the Messenger? And when they come to 
you "O Prophet”, they greet you not as Allah greets you,'41Z8! and say to one 
another, “Why does Allah not punish us for what we say?” Hell is enough 
for them—they will burn in it. And what an evil destination! 


Guidelines for Secret Talks 
9. O believers! When you converse privately, let it not be for sin, 
aggression, or disobedience to the Messenger, but let it be for goodness and 
righteousness. And fear Allah, to Whom you will ‘all’ be gathered. 10. 
Secret talks are only inspired by Satan to grieve the believers. Yet he cannot 
harm them whatsoever except by Allah’s Will. So in Allah let the believers 
put their trust. 


Etiquette of Gatherings 


11. O believers! When you are told to make room in gatherings, then do so. 
Allah will make room for you ‘in His grace’. And if you are told to rise, 
then do so. Allah will elevate those of you who are faithful, and ‘raise’ 
those gifted with knowledge in rank. And Allah is All-Aware of what you 
do. 


Charity Before Consulting the Prophet! 4291 


12. O believers! When you consult the Messenger privately, give something 
in charity before your consultation. That is better and purer for you. But if 
you lack the means, then Allah is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 13. 
Are you afraid of spending in charity before your private consultations 
“with him’? Since you are unable to do so, and Allah has turned to you in 
mercy, then ‘continue to’ establish prayer, pay alms-tax, and obey Allah and 
His Messenger. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 


Satan’s Party 

14, Have you not seen those ‘hypocrites’ who ally themselves with a people 
with whom Allah is displeased? They are neither with you nor with them. 
And they swear to lies knowingly. 15. Allah has prepared for them a severe 
punishment. Evil indeed is what they do. 16. They have made their ‘false’ 
oaths as a shield, hindering ‘others’ from the cause of Allah. So they will 
suffer a humiliating punishment. 17. Neither their wealth nor children will 
be of any help to them against Allah whatsoever. It is they who will be the 
residents of the Fire. They will be there forever. 18. On the Day Allah 
resurrects them all, they will “falsely” swear to Him as they swear to you, 
thinking they have something to stand on. Indeed, it is they who are the 
‘total’ liars. 19. Satan has taken hold of them, causing them to forget the 
remembrance of Allah. They are the party of Satan. Surely Satan’s party is 
bound to lose. 


Allah’s Party 
20. "As for’ those who defy Allah and His Messenger, they will definitely 
be among the most debased. 21. Allah has decreed, “I and My messengers 
will certainly prevail.” Surely Allah is All-Powerful, Almighty. 22. You will 
never find a people who ‘truly’ believe in Allah and the Last Day loyal to 
those who defy Allah and His Messenger, even if they were their parents, 
children, siblings, or extended family. For those "believers', Allah has 
instilled faith in their hearts and strengthened them with a spirit from Him. 


[1180] He will admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay there 
forever. Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. They are 
the party of Allah. Indeed, Allah’s party is bound to succeed. 

kkk 


59. The Banishment 
(Al- Hashr) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name from verse 2, which refers to the exile 
of the Jewish tribe of Banu An-Na@ir from Medina for conspiring with the 
Meccan pagans to violate peace agreements with the Muslims. The 
hypocrites are condemned for their secret alliance with Banu An-Nadir. 
Some instructions are given regarding the distribution of the spoils of war. 
The stirah closes by stressing unwavering obedience to Almighty Allah, 
which is further emphasized at the beginning of the next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Banu An-Nadir Exiled 

1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies Allah. 
For He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 2. He is the One Who expelled the 
disbelievers of the People of the Book from their homes for ‘their’ first 
banishment ‘ever’. You never thought they would go. And they thought 
their strongholds would put them out of Allah’s reach. But ‘the decree of" 
Allah came upon them from where they never expected. And He cast horror 
into their hearts so they destroyed their houses with their own hands and the 
hands of the believers.!!8! So take a lesson "from this", O people of 
insight! 3. Had Allah not decreed exile for them, He would have certainly 
punished them in this world. And in the Hereafter they will suffer the 
punishment of the Fire. 4. This is because they defied Allah and His 
Messenger. And whoever defies Allah, then Allah is truly severe in 
punishment. 


Ruling on Palm Trees and Gains 
5. Whatever palm trees you ‘believers’ cut down or left standing intact, it 
was “all” by Allah’s Will, so that He might disgrace the rebellious.! H821. 6. 
As for the gains Allah has turned over to His Messenger from them—you 
did not ‘even’ spur on any horse or camel for such gains. But Allah gives 
authority to His messengers over whoever He wills. For Allah is Most 
Capable of everything. 


Distribution of Future Gains!#4831 

7. As for gains granted by Allah to His Messenger from the people of 
‘other’ lands, they are for Allah and the Messenger, his close relatives, 
orphans, the poor, and ‘needy’ travellers so that wealth may not merely 
circulate among your rich. Whatever the Messenger gives you, take it. And 
whatever he forbids you from, leave it. And fear Allah. Surely Allah is 
severe in punishment. 8. "Some of the gains will be’ for poor emigrants who 
were driven out of their homes and wealth, seeking Allah’s bounty and 
pleasure, and standing up for Allah and His Messenger. They are the ones 
true in faith. 


Excellence of the People of Medina! #84. 
9. As for those who had settled in the city and "embraced' the faith before 
‘the arrival of" the emigrants, they love whoever immigrates to them, never 
having a desire in their hearts for whatever ‘of the gains’ is given to the 
emigrants. They give ‘the emigrants’ preference over themselves even 
though they may be in need. And whoever is saved from the selfishness of 
their own souls, it is they who are ‘truly’ successful. 


Later Believers 
10. And those who come after them will pray, “Our Lord! Forgive us and 
our fellow believers who preceded us in faith, and do not allow bitterness 
into our hearts towards those who believe. Our Lord! Indeed, You are Ever 
Gracious, Most Merciful.” 


The Hypocrites and Banu An-Nadir 

11. Have you "O Prophet’ not seen the hypocrites who say to their fellow 
disbelievers from the People of the Book, 4185! «Tf you are expelled, we will 
certainly leave with you, and We will never obey anyone against you. And 
if you are fought against, we will surely help you.”? But Allah bears 
witness that they are truly liars. 12. Indeed, if they are expelled, the 
hypocrites will never leave with them. And if they are fought against, the 
hypocrites will never help them. And even if the hypocrites did so, they 
would certainly flee, then the disbelievers would be left with no help. 


Cowardice of Both Groups 
13. Indeed, there is more fear in their hearts for you ‘believers’ than for 
Allah. That is because they are a people who do not comprehend. 14. Even 


united, they would not ‘dare’ fight against you except ‘from’ within fortified 
strongholds or from behind walls. Their malice for each other is intense: 
you think they are united, yet their hearts are divided. That is because they 
are a people with no ‘real’ understanding. 15. They are “both just’ like those 
who recently went down before them:!1/85! they tasted the evil 
consequences of their doings. And they will suffer a painful punishment. 


The Hypocrites Luring the Disbelievers 
16. “They are’ like Satan when he lures someone to disbelieve. Then after 
they have done so, he will say ‘on Judgment Day’, “I have absolutely 
nothing to do with you. I truly fear Allah—the Lord of all worlds.”!4482! 17, 
So they will both end up in the Fire, staying there forever. That is the 
reward of the wrongdoers. 


Judge Yourselves Before Judgment Day 
18. O believers! Be mindful of Allah and let every soul look to what ‘deeds’ 
it has sent forth for tomorrow.'#488! And fear Allah, "for" certainly Allah is 
All-Aware of what you do. 19. And do not be like those who forgot Allah, 
so He made them forget themselves. It is they who are ‘truly’ rebellious. 20. 
The residents of the Fire cannot be equal to the residents of Paradise. “Only” 
the residents of Paradise will be successful. 


Impact of the Quran 
21. Had We sent down this Quran upon a mountain, you would have 
certainly seen it humbled and torn apart in awe of Allah. We set forth such 
comparisons for people, “so” perhaps they may reflect.!1189! 


Allah’s Beautiful Names 
22. He is Allah—there is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him: Knower 
of the seen and unseen. He is the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful. 23. 
He is Allah—there is no god except Him: the King, the Most Holy, the All- 
Perfect, the Source of Serenity, the Watcher ‘of all’, the Almighty, the 
Supreme in Might,'4122! the Majestic. Glorified is Allah far above what they 
associate with Him "in worship"! 24. He is Allah: the Creator, the Inventor, 
the Shaper. He ‘alone’ has the Most Beautiful Names. Whatever is in the 
heavens and the earth ‘constantly’ glorifies Him. And He is the Almighty, 
All-Wise. 
oe ke oe 


60. The Test of Faith 
(Al-Mumta hanah) 


This Medinian sirah was revealed prior to the Prophet’s conquest of Mecca 
following the pagans’ violation of the peace treaty they had signed with the 
Muslims at Hudaibiyah. Despite the Prophet’s orders to keep this plan 
secret, a companion by the name of Hatib ibn Abi Balta’ah sent a warning 
letter to the Meccans, hoping that in turn they would protect his family— 
who were still iy Miecca—in case the Muslims failed to enter the city. Soon 
the Prophet ( . (27/5) received a revelation about what Hatib did. The letter 
was interce pe nd Hatib was later forgiven. Mecca surrendered 
peagefgly to the Muslims, and its residents were pardoned by the Prophet 
(-{z.{;). Muslims are instructed to be loyal to Aligi gnd fellow believers, 
ARa the example of Prophet Abraham ( .{z-[;) (verses 4-6). The 
believers are not forbidden from courtesy to ng slims as long as they 
are not persecuting Muslims (verses 8-9). This sûrah takes its name from 
testing the faith of women fleeing Mecca by asking them, for example, if 
they have emigrated for Islam or only to be separated from their pagan 
husbands (verse 10). Other instructions to the believers are given at the end 
of this sirah and the beginning of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allying with the Enemy 
1. O believers! Do not take My enemies and yours as trusted allies, showing 
them affection even though they deny what has come to you of the truth. 
They drove the Messenger and yourselves out ‘of Mecca’, simply for your 
belief in Allah, your Lord. If you ‘truly’ emigrated!#!! to struggle in My 
cause and seek My pleasure, ‘then do not take them as allies,’ disclosing 
secrets ‘of the believers’ to the pagans out of affection for them, when I 
know best whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. And whoever of 
you does this has truly strayed from the Right Way. 2. If they gain the upper 
hand over you, they would be your ‘open’ enemies, unleashing their hands 
and tongues to harm you, and wishing that you would abandon faith. 3. 


Neither your relatives nor children will benefit you on Judgment Day—He 
will decide between you ‘all’. For Allah is All-Seeing of what you do. 


The Example of Abraham and His Followers 

4. You already have an excellent example in Abraham and those with him, 
when they said to their people, “We totally dissociate ourselves from you 
and ‘shun* whatever ‘idols’ you worship besides Allah. We reject you. The 
enmity and hatred that has arisen between us and you will last until you 
believe in Allah alone.” The only exception is when Abraham said to his 
father, “I will seek forgiveness for you,” adding, “but’ I cannot protect you 
from Allah at all.” "The believers prayed,’ “Our Lord! In You we trust. And 
to You we ‘always’ turn. And to You is the final return. 5. Our Lord! Do not 
subject us to the persecution of the disbelievers. Forgive us, our Lord! You 
‘alone’ are truly the Almighty, All-Wise.” 6. You certainly have an excellent 
example in them for whoever has hope in Allah and the Last Day. But 
whoever turns away, then surely Allah ‘alone’ is the Self-Sufficient, 
Praiseworthy. 


Yesterday’s Enemies, Tomorrow’s Friends 
7. ‘In time,’ Allah may bring about goodwill between you and those of them 
you ‘now’ hold as enemies. For Allah is Most Capable. And Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Kindness to Non-Muslims 
8. Allah does not forbid you from dealing kindly and fairly with those who 
have neither fought nor driven you out of your homes. Surely Allah loves 
those who are fair. 9. Allah only forbids you from befriending those who 
have fought you for ‘your’ faith, driven you out of your homes, or 
supported ‘others’ in doing so. And whoever takes them as friends, then it is 
they who are the ‘true’ wrongdoers. 


Marriage of Female Emigrants 
10. O believers! When the believing women come to you as emigrants, 
test their intentions—their faith is best known to Allah—and if you find 
them to be believers, then do not send them back to the disbelievers. These 
"women ' are not lawful ‘wives’ for the disbelievers, nor are the disbelievers 
lawful "husbands’ for them. "But" repay the disbelievers whatever ‘dowries" 
they had paid. And there is no blame on you if you marry these "women’ as 


[1192] 


long as you pay them their dowries. And do not hold on to marriage with 
polytheistic women.!4/23! "But? demand "repayment of” whatever "dowries’” 
you had paid, and let the disbelievers do the same. That is the judgment of 
Allah—He judges between you. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 


When Dowry Is Not Repaid to Muslims 
11. And if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers, and later you 
take spoils from them, then pay those whose wives have gone, the 
equivalent of whatever ‘dowry’ they had paid. And be mindful of Allah, in 
Whom you believe. 


Women Pledge Allegiance 
12. O Prophet! When the believing women come to you, pledging to you 
that they will neither associate anything with Allah ‘in worship’, nor steal, 
nor fornicate, nor kill their children, nor falsely attribute ‘illegitimate’ 
children to their husbands,!4%! nor disobey you in what is right, then 
accept their pledge, and ask Allah to forgive them. Surely Allah is All- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful. 


Do Not Ally with the Enemy 
13. O believers! Do not ally yourselves with a people Allah is displeased 
with. They already have no hope for the Hereafter, just like the disbelievers 
lying in ‘their’ graves. 
oie 2 2g 


61. The ‘Solid’ Ranks 
(A $-Saff) 


The believers are instructed to strive in Allah’s cause in solid battle 
formations (verse 4), hence the name of this Medinian stirah. The disciples 
of Jesus, who stood up for Allah, are cited as an example for the believers 
to emulate. The believers are reassured that the truth will prevail despite 
the disbelievers’ unrelenting plots against it. Those who stand up for Allah 
are promised great rewards in both worlds. The next sûrah provides more 
instructions to the believers. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah Is Glorified by All 
1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies Allah. 
For He ‘alone’ is the Almighty, All-Wise. 


Do What You Say!41991. 
2. O believers! Why do you say what you do not do? 3. How despicable it is 
in the sight of Allah that you say what you do not do! 4. Surely Allah loves 
those who fight in His cause in ‘solid’ ranks as if they were one concrete 
structure. 


Moses and His People 
5. ‘Remember, O Prophet,’ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! 
Why do you hurt me when you already know I am Allah’s messenger to 
you?” So when they ‘persistently’ deviated, Allah caused their hearts to 
deviate. For Allah does not guide the rebellious people. 


Jesus and the Israelites 
6. And ‘remember’ when Jesus, son of Mary, said, “O children of Israel! I 
am truly Allah’s messenger to you, confirming the Torah which came 
before me, and giving good news of a messenger after me whose name will 
be Ahmad.”!4/25! Yet when the Prophet came to them with clear proofs, 
they said, “This is pure magic.” 


Rejecting Islam 


7. Who does more wrong than the one who fabricates lies about Allah when 
invited to submit "to Him™?! #7] For Allah does not guide the wrongdoing 
people. 8. They wish to extinguish Allah’s light with their mouths, but 
Allah will ‘certainly’ perfect His light, even to the dismay of the 
disbelievers. 9. He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with ‘true’ 
guidance and the religion of truth, making it prevail over all others, even to 
the dismay of the polytheists. 


A Profitable Bargain 

10. O believers! Shall I guide you to an exchange that will save you from a 
painful punishment? 11. ‘It is to’ have faith in Allah and His Messenger, 
and strive in the cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives. That is best 
for you, if only you knew. 12. He will forgive your sins, and admit you into 
Gardens under which rivers flow, and "house you in’ splendid homes in the 
Gardens of Eternity. That is the ultimate triumph. 13. "He will also give 
you’ another favour that you long for: help from Allah and an imminent 
victory. ‘So’ give good news "O Prophet’ to the believers. 


Jesus and the Disciples 
14. O believers! Stand up for Allah, as Jesus, son of Mary, asked the 
disciples, “Who will stand up with me for Allah?” The disciples replied, 
“We will stand up for Allah.” Then a group from the Children of Israel 
believed while another disbelieved. We then supported the believers against 
their enemies, so they prevailed. 
kkk 


62. Friday Congregation 
(Al-Jumu’ah) 


This sûrah and the previous one have much in common. Both stayt by 
praising Allah. Those among the Jews who harmed Moses ( .{z-{[:); 
according to the previous stirah (61:5), are criticized igre for not aa ing 
the Torah (verse 5). Since the disciples of Jesus ( ob are commppriged in 
the previous sûrah (61:14), the companions of Tay ngd (la) are 
honoured, jr ghis sûrah (verses 2-4). The Prophet ( .{z-[5) Bee by 
Jesus ( .{z. /;) in the previous sûrah (61:6) and is ee in this sûrah as 
Allah% four to the believers. Similar to the previous sûrah, some 
instructions are given to the believers—this time, regarding the Friday 
congregation (verse 9), which gives this Medinian sûrah its name. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Favour to the Believers 

1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth ‘constantly’ 
glorifies Allah—the King, the Most Holy, the Almighty, the All-Wise. 2. He 
is the One Who raised for the illiterate ‘people’ a messenger from among 
themselves—reciting to them His revelations, purifying them, and teaching 
them the Book and wisdom, for indeed they had previously been clearly 
astray— 3. along with others of them who have not yet joined them ‘in 
faith’. For He is the Almighty, All-Wise. 4. This is the favour of Allah. He 
grants it to whoever He wills. And Allah is the Lord of infinite bounty. 


Unutilized Knowledge!4181. 


5. The example of those who were entrusted with ‘observing’ the Torah but 
failed to do so, is that of a donkey carrying books.'4/82! How evil is the 
example of those who reject Allah’s signs! For Allah does not guide the 
wrongdoing people. 
Challenge to the Israelites 

6. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O Jews! If you claim to be Allah’s chosen "people’ out 
of all humanity, then wish for death, if what you say is true.” 7. But they 
will never wish for that because of what their hands have done.!!222! And 


Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of the wrongdoers. 8. Say, “The death you 
are running away from will inevitably come to you. Then you will be 
returned to the Knower of the seen and unseen, and He will inform you of 
what you used to do.” 


Attending Friday Congregation 
9. O believers! When the call to prayer is made on Friday, then proceed 
‘diligently’ to the remembrance of Allah and leave off ‘your’ business. That 
is best for you, if only you knew. 10. Once the prayer is over, disperse 
throughout the land and seek the bounty of Allah. And remember Allah 
often so you may be successful. 


Leaving the Sermon!224] 
11. When they saw the fanfare along with the caravan, they ‘almost all’ 
flocked to it, leaving you "O Prophet’ standing ‘on the pulpit’. Say, “What is 
with Allah is far better than amusement and merchandise. And Allah is the 
Best Provider.” 
2k 2K ok 


63. The Hypocrites 
(Al-Mundfiqiin) 


Similar to the two previous sûrahs, this Medinian sirah closes by offering 
more advice to the believers. The hypocrites are rebuked for hindering 
others from the path of Allah and discouraging people from donating in His 
cause. In contrast, the believers are advised to donate before they are 
overtaken by death—a reality that can come at any time. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Hypocrites Have No Faith 

1. When the hypocrites come to you "O Prophet’, they say, “We bear 
witness that you are certainly the Messenger of Allah”—and surely Allah 
knows that you are His Messenger—but Allah bears witness that the 
hypocrites are truly liars. 2. They have made their ‘false’ oaths as a shield, 
hindering ‘others’ from the Way of Allah. Evil indeed is what they do! 3. 
This is because they believed and then abandoned faith. Therefore, their 
hearts have been sealed, so they do not comprehend. 


All That Glitters Is Not Gold 
4. When you see them, their appearance impresses you. And when they 
speak, you listen to their ‘impressive’ speech. But they are ‘just’ like 
‘worthless’ planks of wood leaned ‘against a wall’. They think every cry is 
against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. May Allah condemn 
them! How can they be deluded ‘from the truth’? 


Hypocrites’ Unwillingness to Repent!+202! 
5. When it is said to them, “Come! The Messenger of Allah will pray for 
you to be forgiven,” they turn their heads ‘in disgust’, and you see them "O 
Prophet’ turn away in arrogance. 6. It is the same whether you pray for their 
forgiveness or not, Allah will not forgive them. Surely Allah does not guide 
the rebellious people. 


Hypocrites’ Contempt for the Believers 
7. They are the ones who say ‘to one another’, “Do not spend ‘anything’ on 
those emigrants’ with the Messenger of Allah so that they will break away 


‘from him’.” But to Allah ‘alone’ belong the treasuries of the heavens and 
the earth, yet the hypocrites do not comprehend. 8. They say, “If we return 
to Medina, the honourable will definitely expel the inferior.” But all honour 
and power belongs to Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, yet the 
hypocrites do not know. 


Be Faithful and Charitable 
9. O believers! Do not let your wealth or your children divert you from the 
remembrance of Allah. For whoever does so, it is they who are the ‘true’ 
losers. 10. And donate from what We have provided for you before death 
comes to one of you, and you cry, “My Lord! If only You delayed me for a 
short while, I would give in charity and be one of the righteous.” 11. But 
Allah never delays a soul when its appointed time comes. And Allah is All- 
Aware of what you do. 
kkk 


64. Mutual Loss and Gain 
(At-Taghabun) 


This Medinian sûrah takes its name from the reference to the Day of 
Judgment in verse 9, where people are divided into winners and losers. 
Since the last sûrah closes by urging the believers to donate before they are 
overtaken by death, this sirah opens by emphasizing Allah’s power to 
create and His ability to bring the dead back to life for judgment. The sûrah 
concludes by bidding the believers to spend in the cause of Allah, and not 
be discouraged by concerns for their spouses and children. The rights of 
spouses and children after divorce are laid out in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Infinite Power and Knowledge 

1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth ‘constantly’ 
glorifies Allah. The kingdom is His, and all praise is for Him. For He is 
Most Capable of everything. 2. He is the One Who created you, yet some of 
you are disbelievers while some are believers. And Allah is All-Seeing of 
what you do. 3. He created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. He 
shaped you ‘in the womb’, perfecting your form. And to Him is the final 
return. 4. He knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And He 
knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. For Allah knows 
best what is "hidden’ in the heart. 


Earlier Deniers 

5. Have the stories of those who disbelieved before not reached you 
"pagans '? They tasted the evil consequences of their doings, and they will 
suffer a painful punishment. 6. That was because their messengers used to 
come to them with clear proofs, but they said "mockingly’, “How can 
humans be our guides?” So they persisted in disbelief and turned away. And 
Allah was not in need ‘of their faith’. For Allah is Self-Sufficient, 
Praiseworthy. 


A Message to Present Deniers 


7. The disbelievers claim they will not be resurrected. Say, "O Prophet,’ 
“Yes, by my Lord, you will surely be resurrected, then you will certainly be 
informed of what you have done. And that is easy for Allah.” 8. So believe 
in Allah and His Messenger and in the Light!!2°3! We have revealed. And 
Allah is All-Aware of what you do. 9. ‘Consider’ the Day He will gather 
you ‘all’ for the Day of Gathering—that will be the Day of mutual loss and 
gain. So whoever believes in Allah and does good, He will absolve them of 
their sins and admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, to stay 
there for ever and ever. That is the ultimate triumph. 10. As for those who 
disbelieve and reject Our revelations, they will be the residents of the Fire, 
staying there forever. What an evil destination! 


Reassuring the Believers 
11. No calamity befalls “anyone’ except by Allah’s Will. And whoever has 
faith in Allah, He will ‘rightly’ guide their hearts ‘through adversity’. And 
Allah has ‘perfect’ knowledge of all things. 12. Obey Allah and obey the 
Messenger! But if you turn away, then Our Messenger’s duty is only to 
deliver ‘the message’ clearly. 13. Allah—there is no god ‘worthy of 
worship’ except Him. So in Allah let the believers put their trust. 


The Test of Family and Wealth 
14. O believers! Indeed, some of your spouses and children are enemies to 
you, !4204! so beware of them. But if you pardon, overlook, and forgive "their 
faults’, then Allah is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 15. Your wealth 
and children are only a test, but Allah ‘alone’ has a great reward. 16. So be 
mindful of Allah to the best of your ability, hear and obey, and spend in 
charity—that will be best for you. And whoever is saved from the 
selfishness of their own souls, it is they who are ‘truly’ successful. 17. If 
you lend to Allah a good loan, He will multiply it for you and forgive you. 
For Allah is Most Appreciative, Most Forbearing. 18. "He is the’ Knower of 
the seen and unseen—the Almighty, All-Wise. 
kkk 


65. Divorce 
(Af Jaldq) 


This Medinian sûrah outlines the manner of divorce and accommodation of 
divorced women and their young children (verses 1-7). Those who comply 
with Allah’s commands are promised a great reward, whereas those who 
defy Him are warned of the fate of those who were destroyed before. 
Complying with Allah’s orders is elaborated upon in the next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Proper Divorce 

1. O Prophet! "Instruct the believers:* When you ‘intend to’ divorce women, 
then divorce them with concern for their waiting period,'4222! and count it 
accurately. And fear Allah, your Lord. Do not force them out of their homes 
‘during the waiting period’, nor should they leave—unless they commit a 
blatant misconduct. These are the limits set by Allah. And whoever 
transgresses Allah’s limits has truly wronged his own soul. You never know, 
perhaps Allah will bring about a change ‘of heart” later.!1225! 


Divorced Women After the Waiting Period 

2. Then when they have ‘almost’ reached the end of their waiting period, 
either retain them honourably or separate from them honourably.4222! And 
call two of your reliable men to witness ‘either way'—and ‘let the 
witnesses’ bear true testimony for ‘the sake of’ Allah. This is enjoined on 
whoever has faith in Allah and the Last Day. And whoever is mindful of 
Allah, He will make a way out for them, 3. and provide for them from 
sources they could never imagine. And whoever puts their trust in Allah, 
then He ‘alone’ is sufficient for them. Certainly Allah achieves His Will. 
Allah has already set a destiny for everything. 


Waiting Periods for Divorced Women 
4. As for your women past the age of menstruation, in case you do not 
know, their waiting period is three months, and those who have not 
menstruated as well. As for those who are pregnant, their waiting period 
ends with delivery.'4228] And whoever is mindful of Allah, He will make 


their matters easy for them. 5. This is the commandment of Allah, which He 
has revealed to you. And whoever is mindful of Allah, He will absolve 
them of their sins and reward them immensely. 


Housing for Divorced Women 

6. Let them live where you live ‘during their waiting period’, according to 
your means. And do not harass them to make their stay unbearable. If they 
are pregnant, then maintain them until they deliver. And if they nurse your 
child,!4229! compensate them, and consult together courteously. But if you 
fail to reach an agreement, then another woman will nurse ‘the child’ for the 
father. 7. Let the man of wealth provide according to his means. As for the 
one with limited resources, let him provide according to whatever Allah has 
given him. Allah does not require of any soul beyond what He has given it. 
After hardship, Allah will bring about ease. 


An Invitation to True Faith 

8. ‘Imagine’ how many societies rebelled against the commandments of 
their Lord and His messengers, so We called each ‘society’ to a severe 
account and subjected them to a horrible punishment. 9. So they tasted the 
evil consequences of their doings, and the outcome of their doings was 
‘total’ loss. 10. Allah has ‘also’ prepared for them a severe punishment. So 
fear Allah, O people of reason and faith. Allah has indeed revealed to you a 
Reminder,!4240] 11. "and sent’ a messenger reciting to you Allah’s 
revelations, making things clear so that He may bring those who believe 
and do good out of darkness and into light. And whoever believes in Allah 
and does good will be admitted by Him into Gardens under which rivers 
flow, to stay there for ever and ever. Allah will have indeed granted them an 
excellent provision. 


Allah’s Infinite Power and Knowledge 
12. Allah is the One Who created seven heavens ‘in layers’, and likewise for 
the earth. The ‘divine’ command descends between them so you may know 
that Allah is Most Capable of everything and that Allah certainly 
encompasses all things in "His* knowledge. 
kkk 


66. The Prohibition 
(At-Ta hrim) 


This Medinian sûrah deals with any jrgdent that happened within the 
Prophet’s household. The Prophet ( -{z- [;) used to visit all of his wives in 
the evening. It so happened that he stdfed longer than usual at the home of 
Zainab bint Jahsh, where he was offered honey—something he liked very 
much. Out of jealousy, two other wives df flabsah and ’Aishah) agreed 
between themselves to tell the Prophet ek when he visited each of 
them, that his mouth gave off a bad smell, kfewing that he ( .{z- [;) did not 
like bad smells. Eventually, the Prophet made an oath than ea never 
eat honey again, and told HafSah not to tell anyone about this. But she told 
*Aishah that their plan worked. Both wives are subtly advised to learn from 
the example of the two believing women mentioned at the end of the sirah— 
Mary and Asiyah, the wife of Pharaoh—and take a lesson from the fate of 
the wives of Noah and Lot, who were both destroyed despite being wives of 
prophets. The believers are urged in this sûrah to mend their ways and 
genuinely repent to Allah in order to win His eternal reward, whereas the 
disbelievers are warned of a horrible fate. The fate of the disbelievers is 
elaborated upon in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


A Lesson to the Prophet’s Wives 
1. O Prophet! Why do you prohibit ‘yourself’ from what Allah has made 
lawful to you, seeking to please your wives? And Allah is All-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful. 2. Allah has already ordained for you ‘believers’ the way to 
absolve yourselves from your oaths.!!2) For Allah is your Guardian. And 
He is the All-Knowing, All-Wise. 3. ‘Remember’ when the Prophet had 
‘once’ confided something to one of his wives, then when she disclosed it 
"to another wife’ and Allah made it known to him, he presented ‘to her’ part 
of what was disclosed and overlooked a part. So when he informed her of it, 
she exclaimed, “Who told you this?” He replied, “I was informed by the 
All-Knowing, All-Aware.” 4. "It will be better’ if you "wives* both turn to 
Allah in repentance, for your hearts have certainly faltered. But if you 


‘continue to’ collaborate against him, then ‘know that’ Allah Himself is his 
Guardian. And Gabriel, the righteous believers, and the angels are ‘all’ his 
supporters as well. 5. Perhaps, if he were to divorce you ‘all’, his Lord 
would replace you with better wives who are submissive ‘to Allah’, faithful 
‘to Him’, devout, repentant, dedicated to worship and fasting—previously 
married or virgins. 


Warning of Judgment Day 
6. O believers! Protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel 
is people and stones, overseen by formidable and severe angels, who never 
disobey whatever Allah orders—always doing as commanded. 7. "The 
deniers will then be told,’ “O disbelievers! Make no excuses this Day! You 
are only rewarded for what you used to do.” 


Reward of Sincere Repentance 
8. O believers! Turn to Allah in sincere repentance, so your Lord may 
absolve you of your sins and admit you into Gardens, under which rivers 
flow, on the Day Allah will not disgrace the Prophet or the believers with 
him. Their light will shine ahead of them and on their right. They will say, 
“Our Lord! Perfect our light for us, and forgive us. ‘For’ You are truly Most 
Capable of everything.” 


Responding to Evildoers 
9. O Prophet! Struggle against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be 
firm with them. Hell will be their home. What an evil destination! 


Two Examples for the Disbelievers 
10. Allah sets forth an example for the disbelievers: the wife of Noah and 
the wife of Lot. Each was married to one of Our righteous servants, yet 
betrayed them.!!22! So their husbands were of no benefit to them against 
Allah whatsoever. Both were told, “Enter the Fire, along with the others!” 


Two Examples for the Believers 
11. And Allah sets forth an example for the believers: the wife of Pharaoh, 
who prayed, “My Lord! Build me a house in Paradise near You, deliver me 
from Pharaoh and his ‘evil’ doing, and save me from the wrongdoing 
people.” 12. "There is’ also "the example of’ Mary, the daughter of Imran, 
who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her “womb’ through Our 


angel "Gabriel’.!4213] She testified to the words of her Lord and His 
Scriptures, and was one of the ‘sincerely’ devout. 
kk 


67. All Authority 
(Al-Mulk) 


This Meccan sûrah stresses that Allah’s infinite power is manifested through 
His perfect creation. Those who disbelieve in Allah and deny the 
Resurrection will be regretful in Hell, whereas those in awe of their Lord 
will be richly rewarded in Paradise. Allah’s absolute authority is contrasted 
with the powerlessness of false gods. The fact that there is no protection 
from Allah’s torment is emphasized in this sûrah (verses 20, 21, and 30) and 
the next (68:17-33). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Life Is a Test 
1. Blessed is the One in Whose Hands rests all authority. And He is Most 
Capable of everything. 2. "He is the One’ Who created death and life in 
order to test which of you is best in deeds. And He is the Almighty, All- 
Forgiving. 
Allah’s Perfect Creation 

3. ‘He is the One’ Who created seven heavens, one above the other. You 
will never see any imperfection in the creation of the Most Compassionate. 
[1214] So look again: do you see any flaws? 4. Then look again and again— 
your sight will return frustrated and weary. 5. And indeed, We adorned the 
lowest heaven with ‘stars like’ lamps, and made them ‘as missiles’ for 
stoning ‘eavesdropping’ devils, for whom We have also prepared the 
torment of the Blaze.!4215] 


Reward of the Disbelievers 
6. Those who disbelieve in their Lord will suffer the punishment of Hell. 
What an evil destination! 7. When they are tossed into it, they will hear its 
roaring as it boils over, 8. almost bursting in fury. Every time a group is cast 
into it, its keepers will ask them, “Did a warner not come to you?” 9. They 
will reply, “Yes, a warner did come to us, but we denied and said, ‘Allah 
has revealed nothing. You are extremely astray.’” 10. And they will lament, 
“Tf only we had listened and reasoned, we would not be among the residents 


of the Blaze!” 11. And so they will confess their sins. So away with the 
residents of the Blaze! 


Reward of the Believers 
12. Indeed, those in awe of their Lord without seeing Him!!2!°! will have 
forgiveness and a mighty reward. 


Question 1) Does Allah Not Know His Creation? 
13. Whether you speak secretly or openly—He surely knows best what is 
hidden’ in the heart. 14. How could He not know His Own creation? For 
He ‘alone’ is the Most Subtle, All-Aware. 15. He is the One Who smoothed 
out the earth for you, so move about in its regions and eat from His 
provisions. And to Him is the resurrection ‘of all’. 


Question 2) Are You out of Allah’s Reach? 
16. Do you feel secure that the One Who is in heaven will not cause the 
earth to swallow you up as it quakes violently? 17. Or do you feel secure 
that the One Who is in heaven will not unleash upon you a storm of stones. 
Only then would you know how ‘serious’ My warning was! 18. And 
certainly those before them denied ‘as well’, then how severe was My 
response! 


Question 3) Do You Not See Allah’s Power? 

19. Have they not seen the birds above them, spreading and folding their 
wings? None holds them up except the Most Compassionate. Indeed, He is 
All-Seeing of everything. 20. Also, which "powerless force will come to 
your help instead of the Most Compassionate? Indeed, the disbelievers are 
only ‘lost’ in delusion. 21. Or who is it that will provide for you if He 
withholds His provision? In fact, they persist in arrogance and aversion ‘to 
the truth’. 


Question 4) Are Believers and Disbelievers Equal? 
22. Who is ‘rightly’ guided: the one who crawls facedown or the one who 
walks upright on the Straight Path? 


Question 5) Who Created You? 
23. Say, "O Prophet,’ “He is the One Who brought you into being and gave 
you hearing, sight, and intellect. Yet’ you hardly give any thanks.” 24. 
"Also’ say, “He is the One Who has dispersed you ‘all’ over the earth, and to 
Him you will “all” be gathered.” 


Question 6) Do You Still Deny the Hour? 
25. ‘Still’ they ask ‘the believers’, “When will this threat come to pass, if 
what you say is true?” 26. Say, "O Prophet,’ “That knowledge is with Allah 
alone, and I am only sent with a clear warning.” 27. Then when they see the 
torment drawing near, the faces of the disbelievers will become gloomy, and 
it will be said ‘to them’, “This is what you claimed would never 


come [1217] 


Question 7) Who Else Can Aid You? 
28. Say, "O Prophet,’ “Consider this: whether Allah causes me and those 
with me to die or shows us mercy, who will save the disbelievers from a 
painful punishment?”!/248! 29, Say, “He is the Most Compassionate—in 
Him ‘alone’ we believe, and in Him ‘alone’ we trust. You will soon know 
who is clearly astray.” 30. Say, “Consider this: if your water were to sink 
"into the earth’, then who ‘else’ could bring you flowing water?” 
2k 2K ok 


68. The Pen 
(Al-Qalam) 


In this Meccan sûrah pheP rophet’s heart is reassured and his character is 
highly praised. He ( .{z- [;) is advised to be steadfast and not to yield to the 
pagans who reject mirage and call him insane. The pagans are warned 
of an evil fate in this world and the Hereafter. To deter the pagans, the fate 
of some earlier disbelievers is cited in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Excellence of the Prophet 
1. Nun. By the pen and what everyone writes! 2. By the grace of your Lord, 
you "O Prophet" are not insane. 3. You will certainly have a never-ending 
reward. 4. And you are truly "a man’ of outstanding character. 5. Soon you 
and the pagans will see, 6. which of you is mad. 7. Surely your Lord ‘alone’ 
knows best who has strayed from His Way and who is rightly" guided. 


Warning the Prophet About the Deniers 

8. So do not give in to the deniers. 9. They wish you would compromise so 
they would yield ‘to you’. 10. And do not obey the despicable, vain oath- 
taker, 11. slanderer, gossip-monger, 12. withholder of good, transgressor, 
evildoer, 13. brute, and—on top of all that—an illegitimate child. 14. Now, 
‘simply’ because he has been blessed with ‘abundant’ wealth and children, 
15. whenever Our revelations are recited to him, he says, “Ancient fables!” 
16. We will soon mark his snout.!4219! 


The Test of the Garden Owners!12201 
17. Indeed, We have tested those "Meccans’ as We tested the owners of the 
garden—when they swore they would surely harvest ‘all’ its fruit in the 
early morning, 18. leaving no thought for Allah’s Will. 1%! 19. Then it was 
struck by a torment from your Lord while they slept, 20. so it was reduced 
to ashes. 21. Then by daybreak they called out to each other, 22. "saying, ' 
“Go early to your harvest, if you want to pick ‘all’ the fruit.” 23. So they 
went off, whispering to one another, 24. “Do not let any poor person enter 
your garden today.” 25. And they proceeded early, totally fixated on their 


purpose. 26. But when they saw it "devastated", they cried, “We must have 
lost ‘our’ way! 27. In fact, we have been deprived ‘of our livelihood’.” 28. 
The most sensible of them said, “Did I not urge you to say, ‘Allah 
willing.’?” 29. They replied, “Glory be to our Lord! We have truly been 
wrongdoers.” 30. Then they turned on each other, throwing blame. 31. They 
said, “Woe to us! We have certainly been transgressors. 32. We trust our 
Lord will give us a better garden than this, ‘for’ we are indeed turning to our 
Lord with hope.”!!222! 33. That is the "way of Our’ punishment ‘in this 
world’. But the punishment of the Hereafter is certainly far worse, if only 
they knew, 12231 


Questions to the Pagans 

34. Indeed, the righteous will have the Gardens of Bliss with their Lord. 35. 
Should We then treat those who have submitted like the wicked? 36. What 
is the matter with you? How do you judge? 37. Or do you have a scripture, 
in which you read 38. that you will have whatever you choose? 39. Or do 
you have oaths binding on Us until the Day of Judgment that you will have 
whatever you decide? 40. Ask them "O Prophet’ which of them can 
guarantee all that. 41. Or do they have associate-gods ‘supporting this 
claim’? Then let them bring forth their associate-gods, if what they say is 
true. 


Warning of Judgment Day 

42. "Beware of’ the Day the Shin ‘of Allah’ will be bared, 224 and the 
wicked will be asked to prostrate, but they will not be able to do so, 43. 
with eyes downcast, totally covered with disgrace. For they were ‘always’ 
called to prostrate "in the world’ when they were fully capable "but they 
chose not to’. 44. So leave to Me "O Prophet’ those who reject this message. 
We will gradually draw them to destruction in ways they cannot 
comprehend. 45. I ‘only’ delay their end for a while, but My planning is 
flawless. 46. Or are you asking them for a reward ‘for the message’ so that 
they are overburdened by debt? 47. Or do they have access to "the Record 
in’ the unseen, so they copy it ‘for all to see’? 


A Lesson to the Prophet 
48. So be patient with your Lord’s decree, and do not be like "Jonah," the 
Man of the Whale, who cried out "to Allah’, in total distress.!1222! 49. Had 


he not been shown grace by his Lord, he would have certainly been cast 
onto the open ‘shore’, still blameworthy. 50. Then his Lord chose him, 
making him one of the righteous. 51. The disbelievers would almost cut you 
down with their eyes when they hear ‘you recite” the Reminder,!4226! and 
say, “He is certainly a madman.” 52. But it is simply a reminder to the 
whole world. 

kkk 


69. The Inevitable Hour 
(Al- Haqqah) 


This Meccan surah re MESO the destruction of the peoples of ° Âd, Thamiid, 
Pharaoh, and Lot ( -{z-/¢) for denying the Hereafter. A reference is made 
to the apocalypse, owed by a touching description of the reward of the 
believers and the punishment of the gisbglievers (verses 18-37). The pagan 
arguments against the Prophet ( -{7_{-) and the Quran are thoroughly 
refuted (verses 38-52). The horog pike apocalypse are further described 
in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Final Hour 
1. The Inevitable Hour! 2. What is the Inevitable Hour? 3. And what will 
make you realize what the Inevitable Hour is? 


Examples of Destroyed Peoples 

4. "Both" Thamiid and ’Ad denied the Striking Disaster.4222! 5. As for 
Thamiid, they were destroyed by an overwhelming blast. 6. And as for ’Ad, 
they were destroyed by a furious, bitter wind 7. which Allah unleashed on 
them non-stop for seven nights and eight days, so that you would have seen 
its people lying dead like trunks of uprooted palm trees. 8. Do you see any 
of them left alive? 9. Also, Pharaoh and those before him, and ‘the people 
of’ the overturned cities ‘of Lot’ indulged in sin, 10. each disobeying their 
Lord’s messenger, so He seized them with a crushing grip. 11. Indeed, when 
the floodwater had overflowed, We carried youll228] in the floating Ark 
“with Noah’, 12. so that We may make this a reminder to you, and that 
attentive ears may grasp it. 


Horrors of Judgment Day 
13. At last, when the Trumpet will be blown with one blast, 14. and the 
earth and mountains will be lifted up and crushed with one blow, 15. on that 
Day the Inevitable Event will have come to pass. 16. The sky will then be 
so torn that it will be frail, 17. with the angels on its sides. On that Day 
eight ‘mighty angels’ will bear the Throne of your Lord above them. 18. 


You will then be presented "before Him for judgment’, and none of your 
secrets will stay hidden. 


The Winners 
19. As for those given their records in their right hand, they will cry 
‘happily’, “Here ‘everyone’! Read my record! 20. I surely knew I would 
face my reckoning.” 21. They will be in a life of bliss, 22. in an elevated 
Garden, 23. whose fruit will hang within reach. 24. "They will be told,’ “Eat 
and drink joyfully for what you did in the days gone by.” 


The Losers 

25. And as for those given their record in their left hand, they will cry 
"bitterly’, “I wish I had not been given my record, 26. nor known anything 
of my reckoning! 27. I wish death was the end! 28. My wealth has not 
benefited me! 29. My authority has been stripped from me.” 30. "It will be 
said,’ “Seize and shackle them, 31. then burn them in Hell, 32. then tie them 
up with chains seventy arms long. 33. For they never had faith in Allah, the 
Greatest, 34. nor encouraged the feeding of the poor. 35. So this Day they 
will have no close friend here, 36. nor any food except ‘oozing’ pus, 37. 
which none will eat except the evildoers.” 


The Quran Is Allah’s Word 
38. Now, I do swear by whatever you see, 39. and whatever you cannot see! 
40. Indeed, this ‘Quran’ is the recitation of a noble Messenger. 41. It is not 
the prose of a poet ‘as you claim’, ‘yet’ you hardly have any faith. 42. Nor is 
it the mumbling of a fortune-teller, "yet’ you are hardly mindful. 43. "It is’ a 
revelation from the Lord of all worlds. 


The Quran Is Not a Fabrication 
44. Had the Messenger made up something in Our Name, 45. We would 
have certainly seized him by his right hand, 46. then severed his aorta, 47. 
and none of you could have shielded him "from Us"! 


The Quran Is the Absolute Truth 
48. Indeed, this ‘Quran’ is a reminder to those mindful ‘of Allah’. 49. And 
We certainly know that some of you will persist in denial, 50. and it will 
surely be a source of regret for the disbelievers. 51. And indeed, this 
‘Quran’ is the absolute truth. 52. So glorify the Name of your Lord, the 
Greatest. 


KKK 


70. Pathways of "Heavenly" Ascent 
(Al-Ma’arij) 


This Meccan sirah, which takes its name from verse 3, condemns the 
pagans for ridiculing the Day of Judgment (verses 1-2) and the Prophet 
(verses 36-37). The truth of the Hour is reaffirmed, along with the horrors 
that will ensue. The qualities of the people of Hell spgathe people of 
Paradise are described (verses 16-35). The Prophet ( Heb? is reassured, 
while the: pggans are warned—both themes are embédded in the story of 
p” i A 
Noah ( ; A in the next sûrah. 
IA 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


A Mocker Asks for Judgment Day 
1. A challenger'!22°! has demanded a punishment bound to come 2. for the 
disbelievers—to be averted by none— 3. from Allah, Lord of pathways of 
“heavenly” ascent, 4. "through which" the angels and the “holy” spirit!222! 
will ascend to Him on a Day fifty thousand years in length. H4 5, So 
endure ‘this denial, O Prophet,’ with beautiful patience. 6. They truly see 
this "Day’ as impossible, 7. but We see it as inevitable. 


Horrors of Judgment Day 

8. On that Day the sky will be like molten brass 9. and the mountains like 
"tufts of wool. 10. And no close friend will ask ‘about’ their friends, 11. 
‘although’ they will be made to see each other. The wicked will wish to 
ransom themselves from the punishment of that Day by their children, 12. 
their spouses, their siblings, 13. their clan that sheltered them, 14. and 
everyone on earth altogether, just to save themselves. 15. But no! There will 
certainly be a raging Flame 16. ripping off scalps. 17. It will summon 
whoever turned their backs ‘on Allah" and turned away ‘from the truth’, 18. 
and gathered and hoarded ‘wealth’. 


Excellence of the Faithful 
19. Indeed, humankind was created impatient: 20. distressed when touched 
with evil, 21. and withholding when touched with good— 22. except those 
who pray, 23. consistently performing their prayers; 24. and who give the 


rightful share of their wealth 25. to the beggar and the poor; 26. and who 
‘firmly’ believe in the Day of Judgment; 27. and those who fear the 
punishment of their Lord— 28. "knowing that’ none should feel secure from 
their Lord’s punishment— 29. and those who guard their chastity'4232! 30. 
except with their wives or those "bondwomen’ in their possession,!!222! for 
then they are free from blame, 31. but whoever seeks beyond that are the 
transgressors. 32. "The faithful are’ also those who are true to their trusts 
and covenants; 33. and who are honest in their testimony; 34. and who are 
"properly' observant of their prayers. 35. These will be in Gardens, held in 
honour. 


Warning to the Mockers 
36. So what is the matter with the disbelievers that they rush ‘head-long’ 
towards you "O Prophet’, 37. from the right and the left, in groups "to mock 
you"?!1234] 38, Does every one of them expect to be admitted into a Garden 
of Bliss? 39. But no! Indeed, they ‘already’ know what We created them 
from.4235] 40. So, I do swear by the Lord of ‘all’ the points of sunrise and 
sunsetlt236] that We are truly capable 41. of replacing them with ‘others’ 
better than them, and We cannot be prevented ‘from doing so’. 42. So let 
them indulge ‘in falsehood’ and amuse ‘themselves’ until they face their 
Day, which they have been threatened with— 43. the Day they will come 
forth from the graves swiftly, as if racing to an idol "for a blessing’, 87] 44, 
with eyes downcast, utterly covered with disgrace. That is the Day they 
have ‘always’ been warned of. 
kk 


71. Noah 
(Nah) 
This Meccan sûrah describes how Noah ( .{z.{;) strived to deliver the 
message to his people for 950 years ar to the total number of 
Arabic letters in this sûrah). He called them to the truth secretly and 
publically, using logical arguments to prove the mercy and oneness of 
Allah. But his people persisted in denial, only to perish in the Flood. The 
stubbornness of the Arab pagans in the previous sûrah and the long denial 


of the people of Noah in this sûrah are contrasted with how some jinn 
instantly believed once they heard the truth in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Noah’s Appeal to His People 
1. Indeed, We sent Noah to his people "saying to him’, “Warn your people 
before a painful punishment comes to them.” 2. Noah proclaimed, “O my 
people! I am truly sent to you with a clear warning: 3. worship Allah 
‘alone’, fear Him, and obey me. 4. He will forgive your sins, and delay your 
end until the appointed time.!!238! Indeed, when the time set by Allah 
comes, it cannot be delayed, if only you knew!” 


950 Years of Preaching 
5. He cried, “My Lord! I have surely called my people day and night, 6. but 
my calls only made them run farther away. 7. And whenever I invite them 
to be forgiven by You, they press their fingers into their ears, cover 
themselves with their clothes, persist ‘in denial’, and act very arrogantly. 8. 
Then I certainly called them openly, 9. then I surely preached to them 
publicly and privately, 10. saying, ‘Seek your Lord’s forgiveness, ‘for’ He is 
truly Most Forgiving. 11. He will shower you with abundant rain, 12. 
supply you with wealth and children, and give you gardens as well as rivers. 
13. What is the matter with you that you are not in awe of the Majesty of 
Allah, 14. when He truly created you in stages ‘of development™?!/229! 15, 
Do you not see how Allah created seven heavens, one above the other, 16. 
placing the moon within them as a ‘reflected’ light, and the sun as a 


‘radiant’ lamp? 17. Allah ‘alone’ caused you'!~£! to grow from the earth 
like a plant. 18. Then He will return you to it, and then simply bring you 
forth ‘again’. 19. And Allah ‘alone’ spread out the earth for you 20. to walk 
along its spacious pathways.’” 


The Flood 

21. ‘Eventually,’ Noah cried, “My Lord! They have certainly persisted in 
disobeying me, and followed ‘instead’ those ‘elite’ whose ‘abundant’ wealth 
and children only increase them in loss, 22. and who have devised a 
tremendous plot, 23. urging ‘their followers’, ‘Do not abandon your idols— 
especially Wadd, Suwa’, Yaghtith, Ya’tiq, and Nasr.’!1241] 24, Those ‘elite’ 
have already led many astray. So "O Lord’, only allow the wrongdoers to 
stray farther away.” 25. So because of their sins, they were drowned, then 
admitted into the Fire. And they found none to help them against Allah. 


Noah’s Prayer Before the Flood!2#! 
26. Noah had prayed, “My Lord! Do not leave a single disbeliever on earth. 
27. For if You spare ‘any of' them, they will certainly mislead Your 
servants, and give birth only to ‘wicked’ sinners, staunch disbelievers. 28. 
My Lord! Forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my house in faith, 
and ‘all’ believing men and women. And increase the wrongdoers only in 
destruction.” 
kkk 


72. The Jinn 
(Al-Jinn) 


This Meccan sûrah gives an account of a group of jinn who fully submitted 
to the One True God as soon as they heard the Prophet’s recitation of the 
Quran. In comparison, the Arab pagans are criticized for their polytheistic 
beliefs. The pagans are told that the Prophet’s duty is only to deliver the 
message. Bringing about the punishment, which the pagans demanded, is 
only within the power of Allah. The next sûr gju jasovides more warning to 
Ah 
the pagans and reassurance to the Prophet ( - TA 
gs s 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Some Jinn Embrace Islam 
1. Say, "O Prophet,’ “It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened 
‘to the Quran,’ and said ‘to their fellow jinn’: ‘Indeed, we have heard a 
wondrous recitation. 2. It leads to Right Guidance so we believed in it, and 
we will never associate anyone with our Lord ‘in worship’. 3. "Now, we 
believe that’ our Lord—Exalted is His Majesty—has neither taken a mate 
nor offspring, 4. and that the foolish of us used to utter ‘outrageous’ 
falsehoods about Allah.!!243! 5. We certainly thought that humans and jinn 
would never speak lies about Allah. 6. And some men used to seek refuge 
with some jinn—so they increased each other in wickedness. 7, And 
those "humans’ thought, just like you ‘jinn’, that Allah would not resurrect 
anyone ‘for judgment’. 
No More Eavesdropping on Heaven 

8. ‘Earlier’ we tried to reach heaven ‘for news’, only to find it filled with 
stern guards and shooting stars.'/242! 9, We used to take up positions there 
for eavesdropping, but whoever dares eavesdrop now will find a flare lying 
in wait for them. 10. Now, we have no clue whether evil is intended for 
those on earth, or their Lord intends for them what is right. 


Righteous and Deviant Jinn 
11. Among us are those who are righteous and those who are less so. We 
have been of different factions. 12. "Now,’ we truly know that we cannot 


frustrate Allah on earth, nor can we escape from Him ‘into heaven’. 13. 
When we heard the guidance ‘of the Quran’, we ‘readily’ believed in it. For 
whoever believes in their Lord will have no fear of being denied ‘a reward’ 
or wronged. 14. And among us are those who have submitted "to Allah* and 
those who are deviant. So ‘as for’ those who submitted, it is they who have 
attained Right Guidance. 15. And as for the deviant, they will be fuel for 
Hell.’” 


A Message to the Deniers 
16. Had the deniers followed the Right Way, We would have certainly 
granted them abundant rain to drink— 17. as a test for them.!4248! And 
whoever turns away from the remembrance of their Lord will be admitted 
by Him into an overwhelming punishment. 


Worship Allah Alone 

18. The places of worship are ‘only’ for Allah, so do not invoke anyone 
besides Him. 19. Yet when the servant of Allah!!242! stood up calling upon 
Him ‘alone’, the pagans almost swarmed over him. 20. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I 
call only upon my Lord, associating none with Him ‘in worship’.” 21. Say, 
“Tt is not in my power to harm or benefit you.” 22. Say, “No one can protect 
me from Allah ‘if I were to disobey Him’, nor can I find any refuge other 
than Him. 23. "My duty is’ only to convey ‘the truth’ from Allah and 
‘deliver’ His messages.” And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger 
will certainly be in the Fire of Hell, to stay there for ever and ever. 


Warning to Pagan Deniers 
24. Only when they see what they have been threatened with will they 
know who is weaker in helpers and inferior in manpower. 25. Say, “I do not 
know if what you are promised is near or my Lord has set a distant time for 
it. 26. "He is the’ Knower of the unseen, disclosing none of it to anyone, 27. 
except messengers of His choice. Then He appoints angel-guards before 
and behind them 28. to ensure that the messengers fully deliver the 
messages of their Lord—though He ‘already’ knows all about them, and 
keeps account of everything.” 
oe 2c 2 


73. The Wrapped One 
(Al-Muzzammil) 
oe 
This early Meccan sûrah prepares the Prophet (. je for the 
commfgadments yet to be revealed and the challenges ait ¢ The Prophet 


(laí) is advised, both in this stirah and the next, to seek comfort in 
atténce and prayer, whereas the arrogant disbelievers are warned of a 
horrible punishment in Hell. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Empowering the Prophet Through Prayer 

1. O you wrapped ‘in your clothes’! 2. Stand all night "in prayer’ except a 
little— 3. "pray" half the night, or a little less, 4. or a little more—and recite 
the Quran ‘properly’ in a measured way. 5. ‘For’ We will soon send upon 
you a weighty revelation. 6. Indeed, worship in the night is more impactful 
and suitable for recitation. 7. For during the day you are over-occupied 
“with worldly duties’. 8. "Always’ remember the Name of your Lord, and 
devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly. 9. "He is the’ Lord of the east and 
the west. There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Him, so take Him 
“alone’ as a Trustee of Affairs. 


Reassuring the Prophet 
10. Be patient "O Prophet’ with what they say, and depart from them 
courteously. 11. And leave to Me the deniers—the people of luxury—and 
bear with them for a little while. 12. For’ We certainly have shackles, a 
‘raging’ Fire, 13. choking food, and a painful punishment ‘in store for them’ 
14. on the Day the earth and mountains will shake ‘violently’, and 
mountains will be ‘reduced to’ dunes of shifting sand. 


A Warning to the Polytheists 
15. Indeed, We have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you, just as 
We sent a messenger to Pharaoh. 16. But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, 
so We seized him with a stern grip. 17. If you ‘pagans’ persist in disbelief, 
then how will you guard yourselves against ‘the horrors of’ a Day which 
will turn children’s hair grey? 18. It will "even" cause the sky to split apart. 


His promise ‘of judgment’ must be fulfilled. 19. Surely this is a reminder. 
So let whoever wills take the ‘Right’ Way to their Lord. 


Night Prayers Eased 
20. Surely your Lord knows that you "O Prophet’ stand ‘in prayer’ for 
nearly two-thirds of the night, or “sometimes” half of it, or a third, as do 
some of those with you. Allah ‘alone’ keeps a ‘precise’ measure of the day 
and night. He knows that you "believers’ are unable to endure this, and has 
turned to you in mercy.!!248! So recite "in prayer’ whatever you can from the 
Quran. He knows that some of you will be sick, some will be travelling 
throughout the land seeking Allah’s bounty, and some fighting in the cause 
of Allah. So recite whatever you can from it. And ‘continue to’ perform 
"regular’ prayers, pay alms-tax, and lend to Allah a good loan.!!24%! 
Whatever good you send forth for yourselves, you will find it with Allah far 
better and more rewarding.!1252] And seek Allah’s forgiveness. Surely Allah 
is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 
kkk 


74. The One Covered up 
(Al-Muddaaththir) 


Following his first encounter withy ize angel Gabriel at a cave in the 
outskirts of Mecca, the Prophet ( .{z-[;) rushed to his house in total shock, 
asking his wife to cover him wit is cloak. Later, this Meccan stirah was 
revealed, urging him ( .{z-.{;) to shoulder the responsibility of delivering 
the message. Allah pr mises to deal with the pagan tyrants who oppose the 
truth, defame the Quran, and ridicule warnings of Hell. The pagan denial of 
the Hereafter is dealt with in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


A Message to the Prophet 
1. O you covered up ‘in your clothes"! 2. Arise and warn ‘all’. 3. Revere 
your Lord ‘alone’. 4. Purify your garments. 5. ‘Continue to` shun idols. 6. 
Do not do a favour expecting more "in retum”. H 7, And persevere for 
"the sake of" your Lord. 8. "For" when the Trumpet will be sounded,42*2! 9, 
that will ‘truly’ be a difficult Day— 10. far from easy for the disbelievers. 


The Fate of a Denier! t2331 

11. And leave to me "O Prophet’ the one I created all by Myself, 12. and 
granted him abundant wealth, 13. and children always by his side, 14. and 
made life very easy for him. 15. Yet he is hungry for more. 16. But no! ‘For’ 
he has been truly stubborn with Our revelations. 17. I will make his fate 
unbearable, 18. for he contemplated and determined ‘a degrading label for 
the Quran’. 19. May he be condemned! How evil was what he determined! 
20. May he be condemned even more! How evil was what he determined! 
21. Then he re-contemplated ‘in frustration’, 22. then frowned and scowled, 
23. then turned his back ‘on the truth’ and acted arrogantly, 24. saying, 
“This ‘Quran’ is nothing but magic from the ancients. 25. This is no more 
than the word of a man.” 26. Soon I will burn him in Hell! 27. And what 
will make you realize what Hell is? 28. It does not let anyone live or die, 
[1254] 29, scorching the skin. 30. It is overseen by nineteen “keepers”. 


The Nineteen Keepers of Hell 


31. We have appointed only ‘stern’ angels as wardens of the Fire. And We 
have made their number only as a test for the disbelievers,!12°5! so that the 
People of the Book will be certain, and the believers will increase in faith, 
and neither the People of the Book nor the believers will have any doubts, 
and so that those ‘hypocrites’ with sickness in their hearts and the 
disbelievers will argue, “What does Allah mean by such a number?” In this 
way Allah leaves whoever He wills to stray and guides whoever He wills. 
And none knows the forces of your Lord except He. And this ‘description 
of Hell is only a reminder to humanity. 


Warning of Hell 
32. But no! By the moon, 33. and the night as it retreats, 34. and the day as 
it breaks! 35. Surely Hell is one of the mightiest catastrophes— 36. a 
warning to humankind, 37. to whichever of you chooses to take the lead or 
lag behind. 


What Leads the Wicked to Hell 

38. Every soul will be detained for what it has done, 39. except the people 
of the right, 40. who will be in Gardens, asking one another 41. about the 
wicked ‘who will then be asked’: 42. “What has landed you in Hell?” 43. 
They will reply, “We were not of those who prayed, 44. nor did we feed the 
poor. 45. We used to indulge "in falsehood’ along with others, 46. and deny 
the Day of Judgment, 47. until the inevitable came to us.” 48. So the pleas 
of intercessors will be of no benefit to them. 


Warning to Pagan Deniers 
49. Now, what is the matter with them that they are turning away from the 
reminder, 50. as if they were spooked zebras 51. fleeing from a lion? 52. In 
fact, each one of them wishes to be given a "personal" letter ‘from Allah’ for 
all "to read’.!425&] 53, But no! In fact, they do not fear the Hereafter. 54. 
Enough! Surely this "Quran" is a reminder. 55. So let whoever wills be 
mindful of it. 56. But they cannot do so unless Allah wills. He ‘alone’ is 
worthy to be feared and entitled to forgive. 
kkk 


75. The ‘Rising for’ Judgment 
(Al-Qiyamah) 


This Meccan surah refutes the pagan denial of resurrection and judgment. 
The sûrah makes it clear that death and judgment are inescapable. The fact 
that Allah created humans from humble fluids and is able to bring all to 
account is detailed in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to Deniers of Resurrection 

1. I do swear by the Day of Judgment! 2. And I do swear by the self- 
reproaching soul! 3. Do people think We cannot reassemble their bones? 4. 
Yes "indeed"! We are ‘most’ capable of restoring ‘even’ their very fingertips. 
[1257] 5, Still people want to deny what is yet to come, 6. asking 
"mockingly’, “When is this Day of Judgment?” 7. But when the sight is 
stunned, 8. and the moon is dimmed, 9. and the sun and the moon are 
brought together, !4258! 10. on that Day one will cry, “Where is the escape?” 
11. But no! There will be no refuge. 12. On that Day all will end up before 
your Lord. 13. All will then be informed of what they have sent forth and 
left behind. 14. In fact, people will testify against their own souls, +231] 15. 
despite the excuses they come up with. 


The Prophet’s Rush to Memorize the Quran 
16. Do not rush your tongue trying to memorize ‘a revelation of’ the Quran. 
17. It is certainly upon Us to ‘make you" memorize and recite it. 18. So 
once We have recited a revelation ‘through Gabriel’, follow its recitation 
‘closely’. 19. Then it is surely upon Us to make it clear ‘to you’. 


Another Warning to the Deniers 
20. But no! In fact, you love this fleeting world, 21. and neglect the 
Hereafter. 22. On that Day ‘some’ faces will be bright, 23. looking at their 
Lord. 24. And ‘other’ faces will be gloomy, 25. anticipating something 
devastating to befall them. 


Death of a Denier 


26. But no! "Beware of the day’ when the soul reaches the collar bone ‘as it 
leaves’, 27. and it will be said, “Is there any healer "who can save this 
life’?” 28. And the dying person realizes it is ‘their’ time to depart, 29. and 
‘then’ their feet are tied together "in a shroud’. 30. On that day they will be 
driven to your Lord ‘alone’. 31. This denier neither believed nor prayed, 32. 
but persisted in denial and turned away, 33. then went to their own people, 
walking boastfully. 34. Woe to you, and more woe! 35. Again, woe to you, 
and even more woe! 


Allah’s Ability to Create and Resurrect 
36. Do people think they will be left without purpose? 37. Were they not 
‘once’ a sperm-drop emitted? 38. Then they became a clinging clot ‘of 
blood’,!12®2! then He developed and perfected their form, 39. producing 
from it both sexes, male and female. 40. Is such "a Creator’ unable to bring 
the dead back to life? 
22 oe 


76. Humans 
(Al-Insân) 


This Meccan sûrah reminds the human beings of how Allah created them, 
equipped them with different faculties, showed them the Way, and gave them 
free choice. The reward of those who choose to believe is mentioned at 
length in this sûrah but passingly in the next sûrah (77:41-44), whereas the 
reward of those who choose to disbelieve is mentioned passingly fiğghis 
sûrah (verse 4) but in great detail in the next. The Prophet ( (2) is 
advised to be steadfast and not yield to the deniers of Judgment ee 


kadi 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Free Choice 
1. Is there not a period of time when each human is nothing yet worth 
mentioning? t261] 2. ‘For’ indeed, We ‘alone’ created humans from a drop of 
mixed fluids,!+282% "in order’ to test them, so We made them hear and see. 3. 
We already showed them the Way, whether they "choose to’ be grateful or 


ungrateful. 


Reward of the Ungrateful 
4. Indeed, We have prepared for the disbelievers chains, shackles, and a 
blazing Fire. 


Reward of the Grateful 

5. Indeed, the virtuous will have a drink ‘of pure wine'—flavoured with 
camphor— 6. ‘from’ a spring where Allah’s servants will drink, flowing at 
their will. 7. They ‘are those who’ fulfil ‘their’ vows and fear a Day of 
sweeping horror, 8. and give food—despite their desire for it—to the poor, 
the orphan, and the captive, 9. "saying to themselves,’ “We feed you only 
for the sake of Allah, seeking neither reward nor thanks from you. 10. We 
fear from our Lord a horribly distressful Day.” 11. So Allah will deliver 
them from the horror of that Day, and grant them radiance and joy, 12. and 
reward them for their perseverance with a Garden ‘in Paradise’ and 
“garments of" silk. 


Pleasures in Paradise 


13. There they will be reclining on ‘canopied" couches, never seeing 
scorching heat or bitter cold.'4263! 14. The Garden’s shade will be right 
above them, and its fruit will be made very easy to reach. 15. They will be 
waited on with silver vessels and cups of crystal— 16. crystalline silver, 
filled precisely as desired. 17. And they will be given a drink ‘of pure wine’ 
flavoured with ginger 18. from a spring there, called Salsabil. 19. They will 
be waited on by eternal youths. If you saw them, you would think they were 
scattered pearls. 20. And if you looked around, you would see 
“indescribable” bliss and a vast kingdom. 21. The virtuous will be ‘dressed’ 
in garments of fine green silk and rich brocade, and adorned with bracelets 
of silver, and their Lord will give them a purifying drink.!!2! 22. "And they 
will be told,’ “All this is surely a reward for you. Your striving has been 
appreciated.” 


Reassuring the Prophet 
23. Indeed, it is We Who have revealed the Quran to you "O Prophet’ in 
stages. 24. So be patient with your Lord’s decree, and do not yield to any 
evildoer or ‘staunch’ disbeliever from among them. 25. "Always' remember 
the Name of your Lord morning and evening, 26. and prostrate before Him 
during part of the night,'4265! and glorify Him long at night.!1256! 


A Message to the Deniers 
27. Surely those ‘pagans’ love this fleeting world, ‘totally’ neglecting a 
weighty Day ahead of them. 28. It is We Who created them and perfected 
their “physical” form. But if We will, We can easily replace them with 
others. 29. Surely this is a reminder. So let whoever wills take the "Right’ 
Way to their Lord. 30. But you cannot will "to do so’ unless Allah wills. 
Indeed, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 31. He admits whoever He wills 
into His mercy. As for the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful 
punishment 
oie 2 oe 


77. Those ‘Winds’ Sent Forth 
(Al-Mursalat) 


Like the two previous stirahs and the next two sûrahs, this Meccan sûrah 
makes it clear that Allah’s power to create should be taken as a proof of His 
ability to bring the dead back to life for judgment. The horrors of the Hour 
and the punishment of the wicked are stated in strong terms. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Judgment Day Is Inevitable 
1. By those ‘winds’ sent forth successively, 2. and those blowing violently, 
3. and those scattering ‘rainclouds’ widely! 4. And ‘by’ those ‘angels’ fully 
distinguishing ‘truth from falsehood’, 5. and those delivering revelation, 6. 
ending excuses and giving warnings. 7. Surely, what you are promised will 
come to pass. 


Horrors of Judgment Day 
8. So when the stars are put out, 9. and the sky is torn apart, 10. and the 
mountains are blown away, 11. and the messengers’ time ‘to testify’ comes 
up—12. for which Day has all this been set? 13. For the Day of ‘Final’ 
Decision! 14. And what will make you realize what the Day of Decision is? 
15. Woe on that Day to the deniers! 


Allah’s Infinite Power 

16. Did We not destroy earlier disbelievers? 17. And We will make the later 
disbelievers follow them. 18. This is how We deal with the wicked. 19. Woe 
on that Day to the deniers! 20. Did We not create you from a humble fluid, 
21. placing it in a secure place 22. until an appointed time?!!282! 23. We 
"perfectly" ordained ‘its development’. How excellent are We in doing so! 
24. Woe on that Day to the deniers! 25. Have We not made the earth a 
lodging 26. for the living and the dead, 27. and placed upon it towering, 
firm mountains, and given you fresh water to drink? 28. Woe on that Day to 
the deniers! 


Bad News for the Deniers of Hell 


29. "The disbelievers will be told,’ “Proceed into that ‘Fire’ which you used 
to deny! 30. Proceed into the shade ‘of smoke’ which rises in three 
columns, 31. providing neither coolness nor shelter from the flames. 32. 
Indeed, it hurls sparks ‘as big" as huge castles, 33. and ‘as dark’ as black 
camels.”!42681 34, Woe on that Day to the deniers! 35. On that Day they will 
not ‘be in a position to’ speak, 36. nor will they be permitted to offer 
excuses. 37. Woe on that Day to the deniers! 38. “They will be told by 
Allah,’ “This is the Day of ‘Final’ Decision: We have gathered you along 
with earlier disbelievers ‘for punishment’. 39. So if you have a scheme ‘to 
save yourselves’, then use it against Me.” 40. Woe on that Day to the 
deniers! 


Good News for the Believers 
41. Indeed, the righteous will be amid "cool" shade and springs 42. and any 
fruit they desire. 43. "They will be told,’ “Eat and drink happily for what 
you used to do.” 44. Surely this is how We reward the good-doers. 45. ‘But’ 
woe on that Day to the deniers! 


Warning to the Deniers 
46. “Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while, ‘for’ you are truly wicked.” 
47. Woe on that Day to the deniers! 48. When it is said to them, “Bow down 
"before Allah,” they do not bow. 49. Woe on that Day to the deniers! 50. So 
what message after this "Quran’ would they believe in? 
kkk 


78. The Momentous News 
(An-Naba’') 


This Meccan sirah thoroughly refutes the arguments of those who deny the 
Hereafter by citing some of the marvels of Allah’s creation to prove His 
ability to raise the dead to life and reward everyone according to their 
deeds. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Pagans Mock the Truth 
1. What are they asking one another about? 2. About the momentous news, 
3. over which they disagree.!!2®9! 4, But no! They will come to know. 5. 
Again, no! They will come to know. 


Miracle of Allah’s Creation 
6. Have We not smoothed out the earth ‘like a bed’, 7. and ‘made’ the 
mountains as ‘its’ pegs,'4222] 8. and created you in pairs, 9. and made your 
sleep for rest, 10. and made the night as a cover, 11. and made the day for 
livelihood, 12. and built above you seven mighty ‘heavens’, 13. and placed 
"in them’ a shining lamp, 14. and sent down from rainclouds pouring water, 
15. producing by it grain and ‘various’ plants, 16. and dense orchards? 


Horrors of Judgment Day 
17. Indeed, the Day of ‘Final’ Decision is an appointed time— 18. ‘it is’ the 
Day the Trumpet will be blown, and you will ‘all’ come forth in crowds. 19. 
The sky will be split’ open, becoming ‘many’ gates, 20. and the mountains 
will be blown away, becoming ‘like’ a mirage. 


Punishment of the Disbelievers 

21. Indeed, Hell is lying in ambush 22. as a home for the transgressors, 23. 
where they will remain for ‘endless’ ages. 24. There they will not taste any 
coolness or drink, 25. except boiling water and ‘oozing’ pus— 26. a fitting 
reward. 27. For they never expected any reckoning, 28. and totally rejected 
Our signs. 29. And We have everything recorded precisely. 30. “So the 
deniers will be told,’ “Taste "the punishment’, for all you will get from Us is 
more torment.” 


Reward of the Believers 

31. Indeed, the righteous will have salvation— 32. Gardens, vineyards, 33. 
and full-bosomed maidens of equal age, 34. and full cups ‘of pure wine’, 
35. never to hear any idle talk or lying therein—36. a ‘fitting’ reward as a 
generous gift from your Lord, 37. the Lord of the heavens and the earth and 
everything in between, the Most Compassionate. No one will dare speak to 
Him 38. on the Day the "holy’ spirit!42”! and the angels will stand in ranks. 
None will talk, except those granted permission by the Most Compassionate 
and whose words are true. 39. That Day is the ‘ultimate’ truth. So let 
whoever wills take the path leading back to their Lord. 


Wake-up Call to Humanity 
40. Indeed, We have warned you of an imminent punishment—the Day 
every person will see ‘the consequences of" what their hands have done, and 
the disbelievers will cry, “I wish I were dust.” 11222] 
kkk 


79. Those ‘Angels’ Stripping out ‘Souls’ 
(An-Nazi’at) 


This Meccan sûrah emphasizes that the Day of Judgment is inevitable and 
its time is known only to Allah. The destruction of Pharaoh is cited as a 
deterrent to the disbelievers. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Hereafter Is Inevitable 

1. By those ‘angels’ stripping out ‘evil souls’ harshly, 2. and those pulling 
out ‘good souls’ gently, 3. and those gliding ‘through heavens" swiftly, 4. 
and those taking the lead vigorously, 5. and those conducting affairs 
‘obediently’! 6. "Consider’ the Day ‘when’ the quaking Blast will come to 
pass,|4223! 7, followed by a second Blast. 8. "The deniers” hearts on that 
Day will be trembling ‘in horror’, 9. with their eyes downcast. 10. ‘But 
now’ they ask ‘mockingly’, “Will we really be restored to our former state, 
11. even after we have been reduced to decayed bones?” 12. Adding, “Then 
such a return would be a ‘total’ loss "for us"!” 13. But indeed, it will take 
only one ‘mighty’ Blast, 14. and at once they will be above ground. 


Pharaoh Destroyed for Denial 

15. Has the story of Moses reached you "O Prophet’? 16. His Lord called 
him in the sacred valley of Tuwa, 17. ‘commanding,’ “Go to Pharaoh, for 
he has truly transgressed ‘all bounds’. 18. And say, ‘Would you ‘be willing 
to’ purify yourself, 19. and let me guide you to your Lord so that you will 
be in awe ‘of Him"?’” 20. Then Moses showed him the great sign, 274 21. 
but he denied and disobeyed ‘Allah’, 22. then turned his back, striving 
“against the truth’. 23. Then he summoned ‘his people’ and called out, 24. 
saying, “I am your lord, the most high!” 25. So Allah overtook him, making 
him an example in this life and the next. 26. Surely in this is a lesson for 
whoever stands in awe of ‘Allah’. 


Resurrection Is Easier than Creation 


27. Which is harder to create: you or the sky?!225! He built it, 28. raising it 
high and forming it flawlessly. 29. He dimmed its night, and brought forth 


its daylight. 30. As for the earth, He spread it out as well,!4225! 31. bringing 
forth its water and pastures 32. and setting the mountains firmly "upon it — 
33. all as "a means of’ sustenance for you and your animals. 


Horrors of Judgment Day 

34. But, when the Supreme Disaster!!227! comes to pass— 35. the Day 
every person will remember all ‘their’ striving, 36. and the Hellfire will be 
displayed for all to see— 37. then as for those who transgressed 38. and 
preferred the ‘fleeting’ life of this world, 39. the Hellfire will certainly be 
‘their’ home. 40. And as for those who were in awe of standing before their 
Lord and restrained themselves from ‘evil’ desires, 41. Paradise will 
certainly be ‘their’ home. 


The Deniers’ Mocking Question 
42. They ask you "O Prophet’ regarding the Hour, “When will it be?” 43. 
But it is not for you to tell its time.!4228! 44, That knowledge rests with your 
Lord ‘alone’. 45. Your duty is only to warn whoever is in awe of it. 46. On 
the Day they see it, it will be as if they had stayed ‘in the world’ no more 
than one evening or its morning. 
kkk 


80. He Frowned 
(Abasa) 


In a hadith collected by At-Tirmizi, a blind man by the nay ‘gf “Abdullah 
ibn Um Maktûm, an early Muslim, came to the Prg t(. +) seeking to 
learn more about the faith, while the Prophet ( (2772) Wastin the middle of 
a discussion with an elite Meccan pagan, yin convince him to abandon 
his idols and believe in the One True God. ’Abdullah was so jmhatient that 
he interrupted the discussion several times. The Prophet ( -{z-[;) frowned 
and turned all his attention to the man he was already a to. This 
Meccan sûrah was later revealed, telling the Prophet (-.(z-/;) that he 
should have tended to the faithful mari gwho was eager to/letin. After this 
sarah was revealed, the Prophet Ae =) would honom { Abdullah, calling 
him ‘the man for whom my Lord febitked me.’ He ( (7712) even appointed 
him several times as his deputy over Medina. T e Lirah calls upon the 
ungrateful disbelievers to reflect on how Allah produces plants out of the 
earth to realize how He can bring the dead out of their graves. The 
description of the horrors of the apocalypse is carried over to the next 
sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


A Lesson to the Prophet!!223] 


1. He frowned and turned "his attention’ away, 2. simply" because the blind 
man came to him ‘interrupting’. 3. You never know ‘O Prophet’, perhaps he 
may be purified, 4. or he may be mindful, benefitting from the reminder. 5. 
As for the one who was indifferent, 6. you gave him your ‘undivided’ 
attention, 7. even though you are not to blame if he would not be purified. 
8. But as for the one who came to you, eager ‘to learn’, 9. being in awe ‘of 
Allah’, 10. you were inattentive to him. 11. But no! This ‘revelation’ is truly 
a reminder. 12. So let whoever wills be mindful of it. 13. It is "written on 
pages held in honour— 14. highly esteemed, purified— 15. by the hands of 
angel-scribes, 16. honourable and virtuous. 


A Reminder to Resurrection Deniers 


17. Condemned are ‘disbelieving’ humans! How ungrateful they are ‘to 
Allah’! 18. From what substance did He create them? 19. He created them 
from a sperm-drop, and ordained their development. 20. Then He makes the 
way easy for them,!4282! 21. then causes them to die and be buried.!!28!! 22. 
Then when He wills, He will resurrect them. 23. But no! They have failed 
to comply with what He ordered. 24. Let people then consider their food: 
25. how We pour down rain in abundance 26. and meticulously split the 
earth open ‘for sprouts’, 27. causing grain to grow in it, 28. as well as 
grapes and greens, 29. and olives and palm trees, 30. and dense orchards, 
31. and fruit and fodder— 32. all as "a means of' sustenance for you and 
your animals. 


The Overwhelming Day 
33. Then, when the Deafening Blast!!282! comes to pass— 34. on that Day 
every person will flee from their own siblings, 35. and "even’ their mother 
and father, 36. and ‘even’ their spouse and children. 37. For then everyone 
will have enough concern of their own. 38. On that Day ‘some’ faces will 
be bright, 39. laughing and rejoicing, 40. while ‘other’ faces will be dusty, 
41. cast in gloom— 42. those are the disbelievers, the wicked’ sinners. 
kkk 


81. Putting out ‘the Sun’ 
(At- Takwir) 


This Meccan sûrah describes some of the apocalyptic events leading up to 
the Day of Judgment, stating that everyone will meet the consequences of 
their deeds. The stirah closes by emphgsigng that the Quran is Allah’s 
revealed Word and that the Prophet ( Ae) is not insane, as the pagans 
claim. Ker 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Horrors of the Apocalypse 

1. When the sun is put out, 2. and when the stars fall down, 3. and when the 
mountains are blown away, 4. and when pregnant camels are left untended, 
[1283] 5, and when wild beasts are gathered together, 84 6. and when the 
seas are set on fire,!1285] 7, and when the souls "and their bodies” are paired 
‘once more’, 8. and when baby girls, buried alive, are asked 9. for what 
crime they were put to death,'4286! 10. and when the records "of deeds” are 
laid open, 11. and when the sky is stripped away, 12. and when the Hellfire 
is fiercely flared up, 13. and when Paradise is brought near— 14. ‘on that 
Day’ each soul will know what ‘deeds’ it has brought along. 


A Message to the Deniers 

15. I do swear by the receding stars 16. which travel and hide,!!28Z! 17. and 
the night as it falls 18. and the day as it breaks!!1288! 19, Indeed, this 
‘Quran’ is the Word of "Allah delivered by Gabriel,’ a noble messenger- 
angel, 20. full of power, held in honour by the Lord of the Throne, 21. 
obeyed there "in heaven’, and trustworthy. 22. And your fellow man!289! js 
not insane. 23. And he did see that “angel” on the clear horizon,!42“2! 24. and 
he does not withhold ‘what is revealed to him of’ the unseen. 25. And this 
"Quran" is not the word of an outcast devil.!!22"! 26. So what "other path 
would you take? 27. Surely this ‘Quran’ is only a reminder to the whole 
world— 28. to whoever of you wills to take the Straight Way. 29. But you 
cannot will "to do so’, except by the Will of Allah, the Lord of all worlds. 


KKK 


82. The ‘Sky’ Splitting Open 
(Al-Infi far) 


Like the previous sûrah, this Meccan sûrah describes some of the horrors of 
the Day of Judgment. The disbelievers are criticized for being ungrateful to 
their Creator. Everyone—including the cheaters mentioned in the next sirah— 
will be held accountable for their deeds, which are perfectly recorded by 
vigilant angels. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Horrors of the Final Hour 
1. When the sky splits open, 2. and when the stars fall away, 3. and when 
the seas burst forth, 4. and when the graves spill out, 5. ‘then’ each soul will 
know what it has sent forth or left behind. 


Human Ingratitude 
6. O humanity! What has emboldened you against your Lord, the Most 
Generous, 7. Who created you, fashioned you, and perfected your design, 8. 
moulding you in whatever form He willed? 9. But no! In fact, you deny the 
‘final’ Judgment, 10. while you are certainly observed by vigilant, 11. 
honourable angels, recording ‘everything’. 12. They know whatever you do. 


Warning of Judgment Day 
13. Indeed, the virtuous will be in bliss, 14. and the wicked will be in Hell, 
15. burning in it on Judgment Day, 16. and they will have no escape from it. 
17. What will make you realize what Judgment Day is? 18. Again, what 
will make you realize what Judgment Day is? 19. ‘It is’ the Day no soul will 
be of ‘any’ benefit to another whatsoever, for all authority on that Day 
belongs to Allah ‘entirely’. 
kkk 


83. Defrauders 
(Al-Mu faffifin) 


This Meccan sûrah begins with a warning to those who defraud scales 
about the horrible Day ahead, where the wicked will be severely punished 
and the virtuous will be richly rewarded. The surah closes by stating that 
the disbelievers will be paid back for making fun of the believers. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to Those Who Cheat Others 
1. Woe to the defrauders! 2. Those who take full measure ‘when they buy’ 
from people, 3. but give less when they measure or weigh for buyers. 4. Do 
such people not think that they will be resurrected 5. for a tremendous Day 
— 6. the Day ‘all’ people will stand before the Lord of all worlds? 


Fate of the Wicked 

7. But no! The wicked are certainly bound for Sijjin'222! "in the depths of 
Hell'— 8. and what will make you realize what Sijjin is?— 9. a fate 
“already” sealed.!1293! 10. Woe on that Day to the deniers— 11. those who 
deny Judgment Day! 12. None would deny it except every evildoing 
transgressor. 13. Whenever Our revelations are recited to them, they say, 
“Ancient fables!” 14. But no! In fact, their hearts have been stained by all 
‘the evil’ they used to commit! 15. Undoubtedly, they will be sealed off 
from their Lord on that Day. 16. Moreover, they will surely burn in Hell, 17. 
and then be told, “This is what you used to deny.” 


Fate of the Virtuous 
18. But no! The virtuous are certainly bound for ’IIliyéin'42%! "in elevated 
Gardens — 19. and what will make you realize what ’Illiytin is?— 20. a 
fate ‘already’ sealed, 21. witnessed by those nearest ‘to Allah’. 22. Surely 
the virtuous will be in bliss, 23. ‘seated’ on "canopied" couches, gazing 
around. 24. You will recognize on their faces the glow of delight. 25. They 
will be given a drink of sealed, pure wine, 26. whose last sip will smell like 
musk. So let whoever aspires to this strive ‘diligently’. 27. And this drink’s 


1294 


flavour will come from Tasnim— 28. a spring from which those nearest "to 
Allah’ will drink. 


The Last Laugh 
29. Indeed, the wicked used to laugh at the believers, 30. wink to one 
another whenever they passed by, 31. and muse ‘over these exploits’ upon 
returning to their own people. 32. And when they saw the faithful, they 
would say, “These "people’ are truly astray,” 33. even though they were not 
sent as keepers over the believers. 34. But on that Day the believers will be 
laughing at the disbelievers, 35. as they sit on “canopied’ couches, looking 
on. 36. "The believers will be asked,’ “Have the disbelievers ‘not’ been paid 
back for what they used to do?” 
kkk 


84. The ‘Sky’ Bursting Open 
(Al-Inshiqâq) 


As a follow-up to the previous sûrahs, this Meccan sûrah elaborates upon 
what to expect on Judgment Day. The believers will receive their records of 
deeds in their right hands and rejoice after an easy judgment, whereas the 
disbelievers will receive their records in their left hands and cry for instant 
destruction. The disbelievers are criticized for failing to submit to Allah, 
contrasted with the full submission of the sky and the earth in verses 1-5. 
More warnings to the evildoers appear in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Horrors of Judgment Day 
1. When the sky bursts open, 2. obeying its Lord as it must, 3. and when the 
earth is flattened out, 4. and ejects ‘all’ its contents!!225] and becomes 
empty, 5. obeying its Lord as it must, "surely you will all be judged’. 


Fate of the Faithful and the Wicked 

6. O humanity! Indeed, you are labouring restlessly towards your Lord, and 
will ‘eventually’ meet the consequences. 7. As for those who are given their 
record in their right hand, 8. they will have an easy reckoning, 9. and will 
return to their people joyfully. 10. And as for those who are given their 
record ‘in their left hand’ from behind their backs, 11. they will cry for 
“instant’ destruction, 12. and will burn in the blazing Fire. 13. For they used 
to be prideful among their people, 14. thinking they would never return ‘to 
Allah’. 15. Yes ‘they would"! Surely their Lord has always been All-Seeing 
of them. 


Invitation to Believe 
16. So, I do swear by the twilight! 17. And by the night and whatever it 
envelops! 18. And by the moon when it waxes full! 19. You will certainly 
pass from one state to another.!1225! 20. So what is the matter with them that 
they do not believe, 21. and when the Quran is recited to them, they do not 
bow down ‘in submission’?!!222! 22. In fact, the disbelievers persist in 
denial. 23. But Allah knows best whatever they hide. 24. So give them good 


news of a painful punishment. 25. But those who believe and do good will 
have a never-ending reward. 
kkk 


85. Constellations 
(Al-Burûj) 


The beginning of this Meccan sûrah condemns the persecution of the 
Christians of Najrân (a city on the border of Yemen and Saudi Arabia) at 
the hands of the pagans around 524 C.E. The tyrants are warned of the 
torment of burning, whereas the believers are promised a great reward in 
Paradise. Both this sûrah and the next swear by the towering sky, 
emphasize Allah’s infinite power, pose a warning to the evildoers, and stress 
the divinity of the Quran. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The People of the Fire Pit 

1. By the sky full of constellations, 2. and the promised Day ‘of Judgment’, 
3. and the witness and what is witnessed!!/298! 4, Condemned are the 
makers of the ditch— 5. the fire ‘pit’, filled with fuel— 6. when they sat 
around it, 7. watching what they had ‘ordered to be’ done to the believers, 8. 
who they resented for no reason other than belief in Allah—the Almighty, 
the Praiseworthy— 9. ‘the One’ to Whom belongs the kingdom of the 
heavens and earth. And Allah is a Witness over all things. 10. Those who 
persecute the believing men and women and then do not repent will 
certainly suffer the punishment of Hell and the torment of burning. 11. 
Surely those who believe and do good will have Gardens under which 
rivers flow. That is the greatest triumph. 


Warning to Arab Pagans 

12. Indeed, the ‘crushing’ grip of your Lord is severe. 13. ‘For’ He is 
certainly the One Who originates and resurrects ‘all’. 14. And He is the All- 
Forgiving, All-Loving— 15. Lord of the Throne, the All-Glorious, 16. Doer 
of whatever He wills. 17. Has the story of the ‘destroyed’ forces reached 
you "O Prophet’— 18. ‘the forces of’ Pharaoh and Thamfid? 19. Yet the 
disbelievers ‘still’ persist in denial. 20. But Allah encompasses them from 
all sides. 21. In fact, this is a glorious Quran, 22. ‘recorded’ in a Preserved 
Tablet. 


KKK 


86. The Nightly Star 
(A¢ Jariq) 


In this Meccan stirah, an oath is made that whatever a person does is 
recorded by vigilant angels and that the Resurrection is as easy for Allah as 
the first creation. Another oath is made that the Quran is a decisive 
message, and a warning is given to those who plot against Allah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Power to Create and Resurrect 
1. By the heaven and the nightly star! 2. And what will make you realize 
what the nightly star is? 3. It is’ the star of piercing brightness. 4. There is 
no soul without a vigilant angel ‘recording everything’. 5. Let people then 
consider what they were created from! 6. "They were’ created from a 
spurting fluid, 7. stemming from between the backbone and the ribcage. 
[1299] 8, Surely He is fully capable of bringing them back "to life’ 9. on the 
Day all secrets will be disclosed. 10. Then one will have neither power nor 
‘any’ helper. 
Warning to Arab Pagans 
11. By the sky with its recurring cycles, 12. and the earth with its sprouting 
plants! 13. Surely this "Quran’ is a decisive word, 14. and is not to be taken 
lightly. 15. They are certainly devising ‘evil’ plans, 16. but I too am 
planning. 17. So bear with the disbelievers "O Prophet’. Let them be for 
“just’ a little while. 
kkk 


87. The Most High 
(AI-A’la) 


Unlike the wicked who plot aggjněg Allah (according to the end of the 
previous sûrah), the Prophet ( .{z-./;) is ordered at the beginning of this 
Meccan sirah to glorify his (Ca his fleeting world [is compared to the 
short life of plants (verses 4-5). The Prophet (-.{z-[;) is reassured of 
Allah’s support, and the wicked are warned of Being in Hell. This 
warning is emphasized in the next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Master Creator 
1. Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High, 2. Who created and 
"perfectly’ fashioned ‘all’, 3. and Who ordained precisely and inspired 
accordingly, 4. and Who brings forth ‘green’ pasture, 5. then reduces it to 
withered chaff. 


The Quran and the Way of Ease 

6. We will have you recite "the Quran, O Prophet,’ so you will not forget 
"any of it’, 7. unless Allah wills otherwise.'42! He surely knows what is 
open and what is hidden. 8. We will facilitate for you the Way of Ease.!43211 
9. So ‘always’ remind ‘with the Quran’—'even’ if the reminder is beneficial 
"only to some’. 10. Those in awe ‘of Allah’ will be mindful ‘of it’. 11. But it 
will be shunned by the most wretched, 12. who will burn in the greatest 
Fire, 13. where they will not ‘be able to’ live or die. 


The Way to Success 
14. Successful indeed are those who purify themselves, 15. remember the 
Name of their Lord, and pray. 16. But you ‘deniers only’ prefer the life of 
this world, 17. even though the Hereafter is far better and more lasting. 18. 
This is certainly mentioned’ in the earlier Scriptures— 19. the Scriptures of 
Abraham and Moses. 
kkk 


88. The Overwhelming Event 
(Al-Ghashiyah) 


This Meccan stirah compares the fate of the evildoers in the Hereafter to 
that of the good-doers. Those who disbelieve in Allah’s might are criticized 
for failing to reflect on the wonders of His creation, and are warned of the 
fate of some destroyed disbelievers mentioned at the beginning of the next 
sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The People of Hell 
1. Has the news of the Overwhelming Event reached you "O Prophet’? 2. 
On that Day ‘some’ faces will be downcast, 3. ‘totally’ overburdened, 
exhausted, 4. burning in a scorching Fire, 5. left to drink from a scalding 
spring. 6. They will have no food except a foul, thorny shrub, 7. neither 
nourishing nor satisfying hunger. 


The People of Paradise 
8. On that Day ‘other’ faces will be glowing with bliss, 9. fully’ pleased 
with their striving, 10. in an elevated Garden, 11. where no idle talk will be 
heard. 12. In it will be a running spring, 13. along with thrones raised high, 
14, and cups set at hand, 15. and ‘fine’ cushions lined up, 16. and ‘splendid’ 
carpets spread out. 


A Message to the Deniers 
17. Do they not ever reflect on camels—how they were ‘masterfully’ 
created;!1302] 18, and the sky—how it was raised "high"; 19. and the 
mountains—how they were firmly set up; 20. and the earth—how it was 
levelled out?!4223! 21. So, "continue to’ remind ‘all, O Prophet’, for your 
duty is only to remind. 22. You are not ‘there’ to compel them ‘to believe’. 
23. But whoever turns away, persisting in disbelief, 24. then Allah will 
inflict upon them the major punishment.'2°! 25. Surely to Us is their 
return, 26. then surely with Us is their reckoning. 
kkk 


89. Dawn 
(Al-Fajr) 
De 

The Prophet (-.{z-/¢) is reassured in this Meccan stirah that the Arab 
pagans are n6t“immune to the torments that befell ’Ad, Thamiid, and 
Pharaoh. A reference is made to the wicked who fail to be grateful in 
prosperity and patient in adversity. The evildoers will be regretful on 
Judgment Day, whereas the righteous will be honoured. Those who 
withhold Allah’s bounties are criticized in this strah (verses 17-20) and the 
next (90:11-16). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Fate of the Deniers 

1. By the dawn,!49! 2, and the ten nights,!42°5! 3, and the even and the odd, 
4. and the night when it passes! 5. Is all this ‘not’ a sufficient oath for those 
who have sense? 6. Did you not see how your Lord dealt with ’Ad— 7. "the 
people’ of Iram—with ‘their’ great stature, 8. unmatched in any other land; 
9. and Thamiid who carved ‘their homes into’ the rocks in the ‘Stone’ 
Valley; 10. and the Pharaoh of mighty structures?!4227! 11. They all 
transgressed throughout the land, 12. spreading much corruption there. 13. 
So your Lord unleashed on them a scourge of punishment.!228! 14, "For 
your Lord is truly vigilant. 


Bad News for the Deniers 
15. Now, whenever a human being is tested by their Lord through ‘His’ 
generosity and blessings, they boast, “My Lord has "deservedly’ honoured 
me!” 16. But when He tests them by limiting their provision, they protest, 
“My Lord has ‘undeservedly’ humiliated me!” 17. Absolutely not! In fact, 
you are not ‘even’ gracious to the orphan, 18. nor do you urge one another 
to feed the poor. 19. And you devour "others’” inheritance greedily, !4222! 20. 
and love wealth fervently. 21. Enough! When the earth is entirely crushed 
over and over, 22. and your Lord comes ‘to judge’ with angels, rank upon 
rank, 23. and Hell is brought forth on that Day—this is when every 
“disbelieving’ person will remember ‘their own sins’. But what is the use of 


remembering then? 24. They will cry, “I wish I had sent forth "something 
good’ for my ‘true’ life.” 25. On that Day He will punish ‘them’ severely, 
like no other, 26. and bind “them” tightly, like no other, !1312! 


Good News for the Faithful 
27. "Allah will say to the righteous,’ “O tranquil soul! 28. Return to your 
Lord, well pleased "with Him’ and well pleasing "to Him’. 29. So join My 
servants, 30. and enter My Paradise.” 
kkk 


90. The City 
(Al-Balad) 


The underlying theme of this Meccan sirah is that human beings are 
equipped with the necessary faculties to choose between right and wrong. 
The good-doers are promised Paradise and the evildoers are promised Hell. 
This theme is emphasized in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Ungrateful Disbelievers 

1. I do swear by this city “of Mecca’— 2. even though you "O Prophet’ are 
subject to abuse in this city— 3. and by every parent and ‘their’ child! 4. 
Indeed, We have created humankind in ‘constant’ struggle. 5. Do they think 
that no one has power over them, 6. boasting, “I have wasted enormous 
wealth!”? 7. Do they think that no one sees them? 8. Have We not given 
them two eyes, 9. a tongue, and two lips; 10. and shown them the two ways 
"of right and wrong’? 


The Challenging Path of Good 
11. If only they had attempted the challenging path ‘of goodness instead”! 
12. And what will make you realize what ‘attempting’ the challenging path 
is? 13. It is to free a slave, 14. or to give food in times of famine 15. to an 
orphaned relative 16. or to a poor person in distress, 17. and—above all—to 
be one of those who have faith and urge each other to perseverance and 
urge each other to compassion. 18. These are the people of the right. 19. As 
for those who deny Our signs, they are the people of the left.43#4! 20. The 
Fire will be sealed over them. 
kk 


91. The Sun 
(Ash-Shams) 


This Meccan sirah states that people have free choice to purify or corrupt 
their souls. Those who choose purity will be successful, and those who 
choose corruption will be destroyed like the people of Thamid. Free choice 
is the highlight of the next sûrah as well. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Purifying and Corrupting the Soul 
1. By the sun and its brightness, 2. and the moon as it follows it, 121 3, and 
the day as it unveils it, 4. and the night as it conceals it! 5. And by heaven 
and ‘the One’ Who built it, 6. and the earth and "the One’ Who spread it! 7. 
And by the soul and ‘the One’ Who fashioned it, 8. then with ‘the 
knowledge of" right and wrong inspired it! 9. Successful indeed is the one 
who purifies their soul, 10. and doomed is the one who corrupts it! 


Destruction of the People of Salih 
11. Thamiid rejected ‘the truth’ out of arrogance, 12. when the most wicked 
of them was roused ‘to kill the she-camel’. 13. But the messenger of Allah 
warned them, “Do not disturb’ Allah’s camel and her ‘turn to` drink!” 14. 
Still they defied him and slaughtered her. So their Lord crushed them for 
their crime, levelling all to the ground.!42/5! 15. He has no fear of 
consequences. 
kkk 


92. The Night 
(Al-Layl) 


This Meccan sûrah emphasizes Allah’s power to create and show the Way, 
the people’s ability to choose between good and evil, and the consequences 
of each route. The fact that the believers will be rewarded to their 
satisfaction is highlighted in this strah (verse 21) and the next (93:5). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Faithful and the Faithless 

1. By the night when it covers, 2. and the day when it shines! 3. And by ‘the 
One’ Who created male and female! 4. Surely the ends you strive for are 
diverse. 5. As for the one who is charitable, mindful ‘of Allah’, 6. and 
"firmly" believes in the finest reward, 7. We will facilitate for them the Way 
of Ease. 8. And as for the one who is stingy, indifferent "to Allah’, 9. and 
staunchly’ denies the finest reward, 10. We will facilitate for them the path 
of hardship. 11. And their wealth will be of no benefit to them when they 
tumble ‘into Hell’. 


Reward of the Righteous and the Wicked 
12. It is certainly upon Us ‘alone’ to show ‘the way to’ guidance. 13. And 
surely to Us ‘alone’ belong this life and the next. 14. And so I have warned 
you of a raging Fire, 15. in which none will burn except the most wretched 
— 16. who deny and turn away. 17. But the righteous will be spared from it 
— 18. who donate "some of" their wealth only to purify themselves, 19. not 
in return for someone’s favours, 20. but seeking the pleasure of their Lord, 
the Most High. 21. They will certainly be pleased. 
kkk 


93. The Morning Sunlight 
(Ad Duha) 


4), saying that Allah has become neglectful and hateful of him 
ot" [). Therefore, this Meccan sûr ahy ýs revealed to refute their false 


léĝations and remind the Prophet ( we DA of some of Allah’s favours. 
E ” 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Reassuring the Prophet 

1. By the morning sunlight, 2. and the night when it falls still! 3. Your Lord 
"O Prophet’ has not abandoned you, nor has He become hateful "of you’. 4. 
And the next life is certainly far better for you than this one. 5. And ‘surely’ 
your Lord will give so much to you that you will be pleased. 6. Did He not 
find you as an orphan then sheltered you? 7. Did He not find you unguided 
then guided you? 8. And did He not find you needy then satisfied your 
needs? 9. So do not oppress the orphan, 10. nor repulse the beggar. H344 11. 
And proclaim the blessings of your Lord. 

kkk 


94. Uplifting the Heart 
(Ash-Shar h) 
alle 
Like the previous sûrah, this sirah reminds the Prophet ( . A of more 
blessings to reassure him of Allah’s continued support in Gee of Mecca, 
which is mentioned in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


More Reassurance to the Prophet 
1. Have We not uplifted your heart for you "O Prophet’, 2. relieved you of 
the burden 3. which weighed so heavily on your back, 4. and elevated your 
renown for you?!4245! 5, So, surely with hardship comes ease. 6. Surely with 
that” hardship comes “more” ease.'12!°! 7, So once you have fulfilled "your 
duty’, strive ‘in devotion’, 8. turning to your Lord ‘alone’ with hope. 
kkk 


95. The Fig 
(At-Tin) 


This Meccan stirah emphasizes that Allah honours humans but many of 
them debase themselves by denying the meeting with Him in the Hereafter. 
Abu Jahl, one of the most notorious deniers is referred to in the next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Reward of Ungrateful Deniers 
1. By the fig and the olive ‘of Jerusalem’, 2. and Mount Sinai, 3. and this 
secure city ‘of Mecca™!!4312] 4, Indeed, We created humans in the best form. 
5. But We will reduce them to the lowest of the low ‘in Hell’, 6. except 
those who believe and do good—they will have a never-ending reward. 7. 
Now, what makes you deny the ‘final’ Judgment? 8. Is Allah not the most 
just of all judges? 


KK K 


96. The Clinging Clot ‘of Blood’ 
(Al-’Alaq) 


Versegg-5 are known to be the first ever revealed of the Quran. The Prophet 
( Hee} was retreating at a cave in the outskirts of Mecca when the angel 

mel appeared to  hinasqueezing him tightly and ordering him to read. 
Since the Prophet ( .{z-/;) was unlettered, he responded, “I cannot read.” 
Ultimately, Gabrie tdfight him: “Read in the Name of your Lord ...” Some 
scholars believe that this encounter is the fulfilment of Isaiah 29:12, which 
states, “Then the book will be given to the one who is illiterate, saying, 
‘Read this.’ And he will say, ‘I cannot read.’”!42181 The rest of the sûrah 
was later revealed $0 deter Abu Jahl, a Meccan pagan elite, from abusing 


the Prophet ( .{z- 17). 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The First Revelation 
1. Read, "O Prophet,’ in the Name of your Lord Who created— 2. created 
humans from a clinging clot.'2!2! 3. Read! And your Lord is the Most 
Generous, 4. Who taught by the pen— 5. taught humanity what they knew 
not. 


The Man Who Abused the Prophet 
6. Most certainly, one exceeds all bounds 7. once they think they are self- 
sufficient. 8. “But’ surely to your Lord is the return ‘of all’. 9. Have you 
seen the man who prevents 10. a servant "of Ours” from praying?! 11, 
What if this “servant’ is ‘rightly’ guided, 12. or encourages righteousness? 
13. What if that "man" persists in denial and turns away? 14. Does he not 
know that Allah sees ‘all’? 15. But no! If he does not desist, We will 
certainly drag him by the forelock— 16. a lying, sinful forelock.!324! 17, 
So let him call his associates. 18. We will call the wardens of Hell. 19. 
Again, no! Never obey him "O Prophet’! Rather, ‘continue to` prostrate and 
draw near ‘to Allah’. 
kkk 


97. The Night of Glory 
(Al-Qadr) 


Since the previous sûrah commemorates the first revelation, this Meccan 
surah celebrates the glorious night the Quran was revealed, which is 
believed to pashe night of Ramadan 27, 610 C.E. The reason why the 
Prophet ( Ae) was sent with the Quran is spelled out in the next strah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Night the Quran Was Revealed 
1. Indeed, ‘it is' We ‘Who’ sent this Quran’ down on the Night of Glory. 
[1322] 2, And what will make you realize what the Night of Glory is? 3. The 
Night of Glory is better than a thousand months. 4. That night the angels 
and the "holy’ spirit'4223! descend, by the permission of their Lord, for every 
“decreed’ matter. 5. It is all peace until the break of dawn. 
kkk 


98. The Clear Proof 
(Al-Bayyinah) 
wise 
According to this Medinian sirah, the Prophet (.{z-/;) was sent so the 
disbelievers may change their ways and deo ME worship to Allah 
alone. Those who believe are promised a great reward, whereas those who 
persist in disbelief are warned of a horrible punishment. The judgment of 
the believers and disbelievers is the highlight of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Prophet Is the Clear Proof 

1. The disbelievers from the People of the Book and the polytheists were 
not going to desist "from disbelief’ until the clear proof came to them: 2. a 
messenger from Allah, reciting scrolls of ‘utmost’ purity, 3. containing 
upright commandments. 4. It was not until this clear proof came to the 
People of the Book that they became divided ‘about his prophethood’— 5. 
even though they were only commanded to worship Allah ‘alone’ with 
sincere devotion to Him in all uprightness, establish prayer, and pay alms- 
tax. That is the upright Way. 


Fate of the Deniers 
6. Indeed, those who disbelieve from the People of the Book and the 
polytheists will be in the Fire of Hell, to stay there forever. They are the 
worst of “all” beings. 


Fate of the Believers 
7. Indeed, those who believe and do good—they are the best of ‘all’ beings. 
8. Their reward with their Lord will be Gardens of Eternity, under which 
rivers flow, to stay there for ever and ever. Allah is pleased with them and 
they are pleased with Him. This is ‘only’ for those in awe of their Lord. 
kk 


99. The “Ultimate” Quake 
(Az-Zalzalah) 


This Medinian sirah states that all deeds will be brought to light and 
accounted for on Judgment Day, which is also emphasized in the next 
sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Horrors of Judgment Day 
1. When the earth is shaken ‘in’ its ultimate quaking, 2. and when the earth 
throws out “all” its contents, 8% 3. and humanity cries, “What is wrong 
with it?”— 4. on that Day the earth will recount everything, 5. having been 
inspired by your Lord ‘to do so’. 6. On that Day people will proceed in 
separate groups'/225] to be shown ‘the consequences of” their deeds. 7. So 
whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it. 8. And whoever does an 
atom’s weight of evil will see it. 
oie ake 2K 


100. The Galloping ‘Horses’ 
(Al-’ Adiyat) 


This Meccan sûrah stresses the fact that people will be accountable on 
Judgment Day for their ingratitude to their Lord. The scene of the people 
emerging from their graves (verse 9) is elaborated upon in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Human Ingratitude 
1. By the galloping, panting horses, 2. striking sparks of fire ‘with their 
hoofs’, 3. launching raids at dawn, 4. stirring up ‘clouds of' dust, 5. and 
penetrating into the heart of enemy lines! 6. Surely humankind is ungrateful 
to their Lord— 7. and they certainly attest to this— 8. and they are truly 
extreme in their love of "worldly" gains. 9. Do they not know that when the 
contents of the graves will be spilled out, 10. and the secrets of the hearts 
will be laid bare— 11. surely their Lord is All-Aware of them on that Day. 
oe oie oI 


101. The Striking Disaster 
(Al-Q4ri’ah) 


This Meccan sûrah describes the Resurrection and the weighing of deeds in 
the Hereafter, followed by the final destination to either Paradise or Hell. 
The reason why many people will end up in the Fire is given in the next 
sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Fate of the Righteous and the Wicked 
1. The Striking Disaster! 2. What is the Striking Disaster? 3. And what will 
make you realize what the Striking Disaster is? 4. "It is' the Day people will 
be like scattered moths, 5. and the mountains will be like carded wool. 6. So 
as for those whose scale is heavy ‘with good deeds’, 7. they will be in a life 
of bliss. 8. And as for those whose scale is light, 9. their home will be the 
abyss. 10. And what will make you realize what that is? 11. ‘It is’ a 
scorching Fire. 
ok 2K ok 


102. Competition for More ‘Gains’ 
(At-Takathur) 


In this Meccan sûrah and the next, the disbelievers are criticized for 
wasting their lives doing things that do not matter in the Hereafter, most 
importantly hoarding wealth. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Wasted Lives 
1. Competition for more ‘gains’ diverts you ‘from Allah’, 2. until you end 
up in “your” graves.'4226! 3, But no! You will soon come to know. 4. Again, 
no! You will soon come to know. 5. Indeed, if you were to know ‘your fate’ 
with certainty, "you would have acted differently’. 6. ‘But’ you will surely 
see the Hellfire. 7. Again, you will surely see it with the eye of certainty. 8. 
Then, on that Day, you will definitely be questioned about ‘your worldly’ 
pleasures. 
ke 2k 2 


103. The ‘Passage of' Time 
(Al-’A $r) 


This Meccan sûrah emphasizes that, unlike the evildoers mentioned in the 
next surah, only those who take advantage of this fleeting life by doing good 
will be successful in the eternal life to come. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Wake-up Call to Humanity 
1. By the "passage of’ time! 2. Surely humanity is in "grave' loss, 3. except 
those who have faith, do good, and urge each other to the truth, and urge 
each other to perseverance. 
ok 2K ok 


104. The Backbiters 
(Al-Humazah) 


This Meccan sirah is critical of those who slander others and withhold 
Allah’s bounties. It is made clear that their punishment in Hell is as easy for 
Allah as the destruction of the evil force mentioned in the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Warning to Defamers 
1. Woe to every backbiter, slanderer, 2. who amasses wealth ‘greedily’ and 
counts it ‘repeatedly’, 3. thinking that their wealth will make them 
immortal! 4. Not at all! Such a person will certainly be tossed into the 
Crusher. 5. And what will make you realize what the Crusher is? 6. ‘It is’ 
Allah’s kindled Fire, 7. which rages over the hearts. 8. It will be sealed over 
them, 9. ‘tightly secured” with long braces.!122! 
kkk 


105. The Elephant 
(AI-Fil) 


This Meccan sûrah recounts the story of Abraha Al-Habashi (lit., the 
Abyssinian), who led a large army of men and elephants to demolish the 
Ka’bah in 570 C.E. so pilgrims would visit the cathedral he had built in Yemen 
instead. However, the army was desypoped before reaching Mecca. It is 
commonly believed that the Prophet 45 TA was born the same year. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Protection of the Ka’bah 
1. Have you not seen "O Prophet’ how your Lord dealt with the Army of the 
Elephant? 2. Did He not frustrate their scheme? 3. For He sent against them 
flocks of birds, 4. that pelted them with stones of baked clay, 5. leaving 


them like chewed up straw.!4328] 
22 2k 


106. "The People of’ Quraysh 
(Quraysh) 


This Meccan sûrah is viewed as a continuation of the previous one. The 
general idea is that the Meccan pagans must be grateful and devoted to 
Allah alone for saving the Ka’bah from the Army of the Elephant. Those 
who are unfaithful to Allah and unkind to the helpless are criticized in the 
next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Allah’s Major Favour to the Meccans!42291. 
1. "At least’ for ‘the favour of’ making Quraysh habitually secure— 2. 
secure in their trading caravan ‘to Yemen’ in the winter and ‘Syria’ in the 
summer— 3. let them worship the Lord of this "Sacred* House, 4. Who has 
fed them against hunger and made them secure against fear.!4330 
kkk 


107. ‘Simplest’ Aid 
(Al-M@’tin) 


This Meccan sûrah, which takes its name from verse 7, condemns the 
deniers of the Hereafter for their lack of devotion to Allah and saps of 

5 ad j 
compassion towards the needy. In the next sûrah, the Prophet ( .{z-[;) is 
ordered to be devoted to Allah alone and share the meat of his/sa€Fificial 
animals with those in need. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Qualities of Judgment Deniers 
1. Have you seen the one who denies the ‘final’ Judgment? 2. That is the 
one who repulses the orphan, 3. and does not encourage the feeding of the 
poor. 4. So woe to those "hypocrites’ who pray 5. yet are unmindful of their 
prayers; 6. those who ‘only’ show off, 7. and refuse to give “even the 
simplest’ ajd. H34] 
kkk 


108. Abundant Goodness 
(Al-Kawthar) 
whe 
This Meccan surah was revealed to reassure the Prophet ( {%7 {¢). Since 
the Prophet’ sons died in childhood, Al- shin Wa'il, an inf He Meccan 
ad 
pagan, used to say that Muhammad ( ; pb would be forgotten because 
he had no son to carry his name. Todgh u hammad > is the most common 
name in the,wpsld, whereas the name of Al-’As is barely mentioned. The 
Prophet ( 2{z-[;) is ordered to be devoted to Allah alone, which is the 
undering Ae of the next sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Good News to the Prophet 
1. Indeed, We have granted you "O Prophet abundant goodness.!!322! 2. So 
pray and sacrifice to your Lord ‘alone’. 3. Only the one who hates you is 
truly cut off ‘from any goodness’. 
kkk 


109. The Disbelievers 
(Al-Kafirtin) 


It is reported that the pagans offezed to worship Allah alone for one year, 
provided that the Prophet ( .{z./;) worshipped their multiple gndgzfor a 
year. So this Meccan stirah vas Tevealed, telling them that he ( (277) will 
be dedicated only to the worship of Allah until the last brea Spb life, 
which is the highlight of the next stirah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


No Compromise in Worshipping Allah 
1. Say, "O Prophet,’ “O you disbelievers! 2. I do not worship what you 
worship, 3. nor do you worship what I worship. 4. I will never worship 
what you worship, 5. nor will you ever worship what I worship. 6. You have 
your way, and I have my Way.” 


KK K 


110. The ‘Ultimate’ Help 
(An-Nasr) 


This Medinian sûrah was revealed close to the end of the Prophet’s life, 
instructing him that once spiggmission is complete and his message is 
embraced by many, he (.{z.{;) should be ready to meet his Creator. A 
deterring example of th Se who rejected his message is given in the next 
sûrah. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Nearing the Journey’s End 
1. When Allah’s ‘ultimate’ help comes and the victory ‘over Mecca is 
achieved’, 2. and you "O Prophet’ see the people embracing Allah’s Way in 
crowds, 3. then glorify the praises of your Lord and seek His forgiveness, 
for certainly He is ever Accepting of Repentance. 
kkk 


111. The Palm-Fibre Rope 
(Al-Masad) 


This Meccan strah is a warning to Aby:fgihab (lit., the Father of Flames), 


both Abu Lahab and his wife 


who was an uncle of the Prophet ( -{z 
Um Jamil used to abuse the Proh A and deny the One True God, 
A o 


Who is described in the next sarah. A- 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


The Fate of an Evil Couple 
1. May the hands of Abu Lahab perish, and he ‘himself’ perish! 2. Neither 
his wealth nor ‘worldly’ gains will benefit him. 3. He will burn in a flaming 
Fire, 4. and "so will’ his wife, the carrier of "thorny" kindling, |43831 5. around 
her neck will be a rope of palm-fibre.!1324! 


KK K 


112. Purity of Faith 
(Al-Ikhlas) 


This Meccan surah refutes the Trinity, idolatry, atheism, and polytheism and 
calls for full devotion to the only True God, Who is worthy to be worshipped 
and Whose protection is to be sought, according to the next two siirahs. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 
Allah’s Absolute Oneness 
1. Say, "O Prophet,’ “He is Allah—One ‘and Indivisible’; 2. Allah—the 
Sustainer "needed by all’. 3. He has never had offspring, nor was He born. 


4. And there is none comparable to Him.”!4322! 
KOK 


113. The Daybreak 
(Al-Falaq) 


This Medinian sûrah is recited as a supplication to the Almighty against 
any kind of evil. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Seeking Protection Against All Evil 
1. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I seek refuge in the Lord of the daybreak 2. from the 
evil of whatever He has created, 3. and from the evil of the night when it 
grows dark, 4. and from the evil of those ‘witches casting spells by’ 
blowing onto knots, 5. and from the evil of an envier when they envy.” 
kkk 


114. Humankind 
(An-Nas) 


Like the previous sûrah, this Medinian sirah is a supplication against the 
evil of humans and jinn. This final sirah emphasizes the fact that Allah is 
the Lord and Master of all and that He is the only One to be called upon for 
help, which connects full circle with the central theme of the first sûrah of 
the Quran. 


In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful 


Seeking Protection Against Evil Whispers 
1. Say, "O Prophet,’ “I seek refuge in the Lord of humankind, 2. the Master 
of humankind, 3. the God of humankind, 4. from the evil of the lurking 
whisperer— 5. who whispers into the hearts of humankind— 6. from 
among jinn and humankind.” 


“oe 


THEMATIC INDEXT 


DOCTRINE 


Basic tenets: Faith perfected 5:3; only Way accepted by Allah 3:19, 3:85; no compulsion in 
accepting Islam 2:256; one religion with different faiths and codes of law 5:48, 22:67-70, 
42:13-14; prophets of Islam 2:135-136, 3:84, 4:163-165; commandments (have faith in Allah 
and do good) 4:36, 6:151-154, 17:23-39, 18:107-108; five objectives of Sharia: protecting faith 
5:54; protecting life 5:32, 6:151; protecting wealth 5:38; protecting honour 5:5, 24:4; protecting 
one’s ability to think 5:90. 


A) RELATIONSHIP WITH ALLAH 
a. The Five Pillars pizsam 


1) Belief in Allah and the Prophet (au Jo) 
Belief in Allah 2:255. Hiz 
Divine qualities, Beautiful Names 57:1-6, 59:22-24, 85:13-16, 112:1-4; only god worthy of 
worship 1:1-4, 2:285, 6:3, 43:84; all authority belongs to Him 3:26; His Throne (’Arsh) 7:54, 
11:7; His Seat (Kursi) 2:255; countless favours upon humanity 14:32-34, 2:164, 16:2-93, 31:20, 
55:1-25; gives life and causes death 44:8, 53:44, 57:2, 67:2; brings about joy and sadness 53:43; 
gives abundant or limited provisions 13:26, 17:30, 29:62; Best of all judges 95:8; Most 
Merciful of the merciful 12:92; All-Loving 85:14; Full of Forgiveness and severe in punishment 
13:6, 40:3; the First and Last 57:3; all honour and power belongs to Him 35:10; knows the 
unknown and sees the unseen 6:59, 6:73, 9:94, 9:105, 13:8-10, 31:34, 32:6, 34:48, 35:38, 39:46, 
49:18, 59:22, 62:8, 64:18, 72:26, 74:31, 87:7; knows best what is hidden in the heart 5:7, 11:5, 
31:23; knows what happened and what yet to come 2:255; wrote everything in the Record (or 
the Preserved Tablet) 6:38, 13:39, 36:12; able to do anything 2:117, 3:189, 8:41, 9:116, 11:4, 
16:40, 40:68, 41:39, 42:49, 57:2; His infinite power 3:26-27, 24:45, 31:28-30; created the 
heavens and earth in six Days and never got tired 46:33, 50:38; creates with the word ‘Be!’ 
36:81-83; never unjust to His creation 3:108, 4:40, 17:71, 21:47, 22:10, 26:209, 40:31, 41:46, 
45:22, 50:29, 64:11, 78:6-16; everything submits to His Will 3:83, 22:18, 30:26; all stand in 
need of Him 11:6, 35:15, 55:29; trust in Him 10:84-85, 12:67, 25:58; forms of divine 
communication 42:51; worthy to be mindful of 2:21, 3:102, 4:1, 33:70-71, 59:18; wisdom is a 
gift from Him 2:269; He is not in need of any one 3:97, 6:133, 112:2; not one in a Trinity 4:171; 


has no mate 6:101; has no children 10:68, 19:35, 43:81, 72:3, 112:3; has no partners or 
associate-gods 6:94, 7:191-195, 46:4-5; nothing like Him 42:11, 112:4. 


Order to reflect on the marvels of His creation 3:190, 6:99, 10:5-6, 13:3-4, 16:10-16, 88:17- 
20. 


Signs in creation 2:164, 6:95-99, 7:57-58, 10:5-6, 13:2-4, 16:10-13, 16:65-69, 16:79, 23:27-30, 
27:60-65, 30:19-25, 50:6-11; created everything for a purpose 10:5-6, 15:85, 16:3, 23:115, 
29:44, 30:8, 38:27, 44:38-39, 75:36; universe perfected 67:3-4; merges day into night 3:27; 
diversity 30:22, 35:27-28; honey 16:68-69; milk 16:66; gift of children 42:49-50; planets and 
orbits 21:33, 36:38-44; constellations 25:61, 85:1; stars 37:6-7, 67:5; clouds 7:57, 30:48; 
earthquake 7:78, 7:155; landslide 28:81, 29:40; storm 10:22; drizzle, hail, and rain 2:265, 6:99, 
24:43, 50:9-11; thunder and lightning 13:12-13. 


Scientific references, humans created from male and female gametes 76:2; formation and 
developmental phases of an embryo 22:5, 23:12-14; fetus in three layers of darkness 39:6; 
earth’s rotation 27:88; constant expansion of the universe 51:47-48; spherical shape of the earth 
39:5, 79:30; the Big Bang 21:30; black holes 81:15-16; brackish water 25:53-54, 35:12, 55:19- 
20; wind pollination 15:22; fingerprints 75:3-4; air pressure 6:125; mountains as pegs 78:7; iron 
sent down 57:25; pain receptors 4:56; the sun as a radiant source and the moon as a reflected 
light 10:5; moon splitting 54:1; sky as a well-protected canopy 21:32; all beings created from 
water 21:30, 24:45; ants communicate 27:17-19; internal waves 24: 40; preservation of 


Pharaoh’s body 10:90-92. 


Living beings, angels 39:75; humans (an authority on earth) 2:30, 6:165, 16:4; jinn 72:1-15; 
animals belong to communities like humans 6:38 (calf 11:69, camel 7:40, dog 18:22, elephant 
105:1, horses, mules, and donkeys 16:8, lion and zebras 74:50-51, monkeys 2:65, pigs 2:173, 
she-camel 7:73, sheep and goats 6:143, wolf 12:17); amphibians (frogs 7:133, snake 7:107); 
birds 24:41 (crow 5:31, hoopoe 27:20, quails 2:57); sea animals (fish 18:61, whale 37:142); 
insects (ants 27:18, bees 16:68, mosquito 2:26, fly 22:73, lice and locusts 7:133, spider 29:41); 


others unknown to us 16:8. 


Plants and fruits 6:99, 13:4, 16:11, 36:33-35 (bananas 56:29, dates 19:25, herbs, cucumbers, 
garlic, lentils, and onions 2:61, grapes 80:28, olives 6:99, fig 95:1, pomegranates 55:68, squash 
37:146). 


- Belief in Muhammad ( ep 3:144, 33:40, 47:2, 48:29. 
Qualities, only a prop et 3144, 6:50, 7:188, 18:110; to deliver the truth 2:119, 35:24, 42:48; 
seal of prophets 33:40; noble character 3:159, 68:4; a role model 33:21; as a favour to the 
believers 3:164; a mercy to the whole world 21:107; a universal messenger 4:170, 7:157-158, 
34:28; leads to the Straight Path 42:52-53; cares about people 9:129; as a witness on Judgment 
Day 4:42, 16:89; ela pigre 7:157-158, 29:48, 62:2; prophesied in the Torah and Gospel 
7:157; foretold by Jesus Ae 61:6. 

2 f ’ 

wilde 

Challenges faced by the Prophet ( .{< r- J6); pagans’ meaningless demands 8:32, 15:7, 17:89- 

93, 25: 7-8; false accusations 10:4, Tf13, 21:5, 24:11-26, 25:4-6, 37:36, 38:4, 52:29-30; 

attempts on his life 8:30, 9:74; warning to those who harm or oppose him 4:115, 8:13, 9:61, 

15:95, 33:57, 47:32, 96:9-19; ordered to respond to denial with patience 20:130, 30:60, 46:35, 

70:5; ordered to seek comfort in prayer 15:97-99; reassured by Allah 5:67, 93:1-11, 94:1-8. 


sila 

Lessons from the life of the Prophet ( EnA from his emigration (hijrah) to Medina 9:40; 
Battle of Badr 3:121-129, 8:42-44, 8:65-71° Battle of Uhud 3:151-180; Battle of the Trench 
33:9-27; Battle of Hunain 9:25-27; Tabak 9:38-123; Banu An-Nadir 59:2-6; Hamrâ' Al-Asad 
3:172-175; Truce of Hudaibiyah 48:1-7, 48:10-29. 


sila 
Honours bestowed on the Prophet EB. Allah and His angels bless him 33:56; night 
journey from Mecca to Jerusalem 17:1{ jotirney to the heavens 53:1-18; honoured in this life 
and the next 17:79, 66:8, 108:1; obedience to him is obedience to Allah 4:80; reward of 
obedience to Allah and His Messenger 4:69; his family purified 33:33-34; sees Gabriel in his 
true form 53:1-18; believers ordered to obey him 59:7; etiquette of speaking to him 49:1-5; 
etiquette of visiting him 33:53; etiquette of dealing with his wives 33:53; Allah is pleased with 
him and his companions 9:100, 9:117; excellence of his faith-community 2:143, 3:110. 

2) Prayer (Salah) 2:45, 9:103, 51:18, 70:22-23, 75:31, 96:10, 108:2; Friday congregation 
62:9; direction of prayer (qiblah) 2:144, 2:149-150; should deter one from evil deeds 29:45; 
times 11:114, 17:78, 17:79, 20:130, 24:36, 24:58, 30:17-18, 32:16, 38:18, 50:39-40, 51:17, 
52:48-49, 73:2-4, 76:25-26; while in danger or on a journey 2:239, 4:101-102; warning to those 
who neglect prayers 19:59, 74:38-47, 107:5-7; hypocrites’ prayers 4:142, 9:54. 


Purification, ablution (wudi') 5:6; full bath (ghusl) 2:222, 4:43; dry ablution (tayammum) 
4:43, 5:6. 


Supplications, ae of Abraha y a Biar ST) 2:126-129, JE 35-41, 26:83-89; Ada Stee Eve 
7:23; Jesus Fe) 114; Job (4 Gy 21: 83; Jonah Gi ab ze ae Joseph Gi nle) 12:33, 
ripe 1; Moses ae mA) 10:88 og, a 25-35; Muha =) 17:80, yn 
Ci sa A 23:26, 2 vel 54:9-10, 71:26, 71:28; ee =) 38:35; Shu’aib (. iy) 

:89;" Zachariah (% IED 3:38, 19:2-6, 21:89-90; angels 40:8-5; Mary’s mother 3:35-36; 
Pharaoh’s wife 66:11; Pharaoh’s magicians 7:126; King Saul and the believers with him 2:250; 
the believers of the Children of Israel 10:85-86; the people of the cave 18:10; the righteous 
2:285-286, 3:8-9, 3:16, 3:147, 3:191-194, 25:74, 59:10; the oppressed 4:75. 


Prostration verses (sajaddat, pl. of sajdah, see Stylistic Features in the Introduction) 7:206, 
13:15, 16:49, 17:109, 19:58, 22:18, 22:77, 25:60, 27:26, 32:15, 38:24, 41:37, 53:62, 84:21, 
96:19. 

3) Alms-tax (zakah), as an obligation 2:110, 2:177, 2:277, 6:141; one of the qualities of the 
believers 22:41, 23:4, 51:19; recipients 9:60. 
Charity (Sadaqah) 2:177, 2:261-263, 2:267-274, 3:92, 63:10. 
Warning to those who withhold 3:180, 9:34, 47:38. 

4) Fasting (Sawm), in Ramadan 2:183-185; hours of fasting 2:187; exemptions 2:184-185; 
intimate relations during the night preceding the fast 2:187; fasting during pilgrimage 2:196. 


5) Pilgrimage (hajj), an obligation one those who can afford it 3:97; rituals and rulings 
2:158, 2:189, 2:196-203, 5:2, 22:26-37; sacrificial offerings 2:196, 22:36-37; prohibition of 
hunting on land while on pilgrimage 5:1, 5:94-95; permissibility of hunting at sea 5:96. 


Minor pilgrimage (’umrah) 2:158, 2:196. 
b. The Six Articles of Faith 
1) Devotion to the One True Allah, see Allah under DOCTRINE 

Faith-communities, Muslims 2:132-136, 3:64, 3:84, 5:111, 22:77-78, 33:35, 41:33, 43:67-70, 
72:14-15; guardians of one another 3:28, 9:71; Christians 2:62, 2:111-140, 4:171-172, 5:14-19, 
5:82-86, 5:116-120, 9:30-31, 22:17; Jews 2:62, 2:111-140, 5:44-45, 6:146, 22:17, 62:6-8; 
Children of Israel 2:40-103, 2:122-123, 2:246-251, 3:49, 3:93-94, 5:12-13, 5:20-26, 5:32, 5:70- 
71, 5:78-81, 7:137-141, 7:148-153, 7:159-171, 10:83-93, 14:5-8, 17:2-8, 17:104, 20:80-98, 
26:52-67, 26:197, 27:76, 44:23-33, 45:16-17, 46:10, 61:5-6; People of the Book (mainly Jews 
and Christians) 2:109, 3:64-115, 3:199, 4:123-172, 5:15-77, 6:20-21, 13:36, 28:52-55, 29:46-47, 
57:16, 57:28-29, 74:31, 98:1-5; Muslims can eat from animals sacrificed by them and marry 
their women 5:5; foods forbidden to Jews 6:146; Sabians 2:62, 22:17; Magi 22:17; polytheists 


(pagans, idol worshippers) 3:186, 6:148, 9:6, 9:17, 10:28, 16:86, 22:17, 53:19-30; pagan 
superstitious practices 2:189, 5:103; 6:138-144; atheists 52:35-36. 


Pagan practices outlawed; burying daughters alive 16:58-59, 81:8-9; killing children for fear 
of poverty 6:137, 6:151, 17:31; whistling and clapping around the Ka’bah 8:35; dedicating 
camels to idols 5:103, 6:136; sacrificing in the name of idols 6:121; Zihar-divorce 33:4, 58:2-4; 
ilâ' (for more than four months) 2:226-227; drawing lots for decisions 5:3; circling the Ka’bah 
while naked 7:26-28; entering homes from backdoors after pilgrimage 2:189. 


Objects of, ane. angels (among some pagan Arabs) 34:40; Al- p h (among the people of 

a) 37:125; Jesus (in 
Christianit ee 17; idols (among the people of Abraham ele) ot. 53; the idols of Lat, 
’°Uzza, and Manat (among Arab pagans) ieee the idols Gi Wadd, Suwâ’, Yaghûth, Ya’ûq, 
and Nasr (among the people of Noah pi 71:23; the sun (the people of Sheba) 27:24; Sirius 
(among some pagan Arabs) 53:49; Pharaoh (in ancient Egypt) 26:29, 28:38, 79:24; desires 
25:43-44, 45:23; belief in multiple gods refuted 17:42-43, 21:21-24, 25:3. 


Shv’aib szlo) 26:176; Ba’l (among the people of ah Hab 


Places of worship, mosques 9:18; churches, synagogues, and monasteries 22:40; sanctuary 
3:39, 38:21; temple 17:7. 


Religious titles, priests, monks, and rabbis 5:44, 5:63, 5:82, 9:31-34. 

2) Angels, inquire about the creation of Adam 2:30-34, never disobey Allah 21:26-27, 66:6; 
are not the daughters of Allah 21:26, 43:16-19; guarding angels 13:11; two recording angels 
50:16-18, 82:10-12; eight carrying Allah’s Throne on Judgment Day 69:17; nineteen keepers of 
Hell 74:26-31; Angels of Death 6:93, 16:28, 32:11; Gabriel 2:97, 66:4, 26:192-195, 53:1-14; 
Michael 2:98; Mâlik 43:77. 


3) Messengers (see Prophets under STORIES), from among angels and humans 22:75; 
Messengers of Firm Resolve (Abraham, Noah, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad) 33:7, 42:13, 
46:35. 


4) Scriptures 
Quran, a revelation from Allah 12:2-3, 20:2-4, 26:192-195, 32:2-3; a reminder to the whole 
world 68:51-52; guides to the most upright way of life 17:9; revelation started in the month of 
Ramadan 2:185; on a blessed night 44:3, 97:1-5; revealed in stages 17:105-106; made easy to 


remember 54:17; confirms the truth in previous revelations 3:3-4; a supreme authority on earlier 


5) 


6) 


scriptures 5:48; no doubt in it 2:2, 10:37; no contradictions 4:82; not fabricated 10:37-39; not 
copied from the Bible 25:4-6; not revealed by devils 26:210-212; no one can produce something 
like it 17:88, 2:23-24,10:13-14, 11:13; protected from corruption 15:9; protected in the 
Preserved Tablet 56:75-80; cannot be proven false 41:42; foretells future events 30:1-7, 48:27; 
moves the believers to tears 5:83, 17:107-109; touches hearts 39:23; brilliant light 4:174, 42:52; 
healing and mercy for the believers 17:82. 


Torah 3:3, 3:93, 5:46, 5:66-68, 5:110, 7:157, 9:111, 48:29, 61:6, 62:5. 
Gospel 3:3, 3:48, 5:46-47, 5:66-68, 5:77, 5:110, 7:157, 9:111, 48:29, 57:27. 


Psalms 4:163, 17:55. 
a 
Scrolls of Abraham ( . {< Je) 53:36-44, 87:14-19. 
Fate and destiny 3:145, 9:51, 10:107, 11:6, 54:49, 67:30; free choice 6:148-150, 11:118- 
119, 16:93, 33:72-73, 39:41, 76:1-3, 91:1-10. 


Day of Judgment, no injustice 2:281, 18:49, 40:17; horrors of the apocalypse 22:1-2, 
27:82-84, 27:87, 40:18, 52:11-16, 69:13-18, 70:8-18, 73:17-18, 75:7-15, 77:8-15, 78:17-20, 
79:34-36, 80:33-42, 81:1-14, 82:1-5, 84:1-5, 87:17-40, 99:1-8, 101:1-11; the righteous and the 
wicked on that Day 11:105-108, 16:27:33, 16:84-89, 18:52-53, 20:100-111, 25:24-29, 30:12-16, 
33:63-68, 39:68-75, 50:20-35, 55:37-41, 83:4-36; intercession (shafâ’ah) 2:48, 2:255, 6:51, 
6:70, 10:3, 21:28, 32:4, 36:23, 39:43-44, 43:86, 53:26, 74:48. 


Records of deeds 17:13, 18:49; believers receive their record with their right hand 69:19-24, 
84:7-9; disbelievers receive their record with their left hand 69:25-37, 84:10-15; nothing will be 
hidden from Allah 21:47, 40:16; weighing of deeds 7:8, 23:102-104, 101:1-11; testimony of 
bodily organs 41:19-24, 24:24; reward for good and evil deeds 6:160, 27:89-90, 28:84. 


Types of people: believers 18:107-108; disbelievers 4:167-169; hypocrites 4:145, 57:13-15; 
residents of Paradise (foremost believers 55:46-61, 56:10-26; people of the right 55:62-78, 
56:27-40); residents of Hell (people of the left 55:31-45, 56:41-56); people on the heights 7:46- 
49. 


B) RELATIONSHIP WITH PEOPLE 


Financial 


Business guidelines 2:188, 2:275, 2:282-283, 4:29, 4:58, 6:152, 17:34-35, 24:36-37, 26:182, 
30:39, 55:7-9, 62:9. 


Bequests, optional bequests to non-heirs 2:180-183, 4:11-12; before death while on a journey 
5:106-108. 


Bribery 2:188. 


Debts, kindness in collecting debts 2:280; writing and witnessing a debt contract 2:282; taking 
collateral 2:283. 


Inheritance, guidelines 4:7, 4:32-33, 8:75; shares of offspring and parents 4:11; spouses and 
maternal siblings 4:12; full siblings 4:176; warning to those who don’t comply 4:13-14. 


Interest, prohibition and warning 2:275-281, 3:130-132; rendered profitless 30:39. 


Legal 
Anti-terrorism law (hirdbah) 5:33-34. 


Justice, standing up for justice 4:135, 5:8, 16:90-91; standing up for the rights of orphans and 
women 4:127; justice to a Jew 4:105-112; justice to a pagan 4:58; fairness with non-Muslims 
60:8-9. 


Retaliation through legal channels (with the option to forgive) 2:178-179, 5:45, 16:126, 17:33, 
42:37-43. 


Separation between husband and wife, khul’ 2:229; li’Gn 24:6-10. 


Political 
Conducting affairs by consultation (shiira) 3:159, 42:38. 


Fighting in self-defence (jihad), etiquette 2:190-192, 2:216, 22:38-40; not to attack 
indiscriminately 4:94; fighting for oppressed men, women, and children 4:75; protecting places 
of worship 22:37; reward of martyrs 2:154, 3:169-171, 9:111, 57:19; military might deters 
potential enemies 8:60; opting for peace 2:192, 8:61. 


Making peace between parties 49:9-10. 
Prisoners of war, treatment 8:70, 47:4, 76:8. 


Social 
Adoption 33:4-5. 


Caring for orphans 2:220, 4:2-10, 4:127, 6: 152, 17:34. 

Decency 7:26, 16:81; the veil 24:31; lowering the gaze 24:30-31. 

Divorce, arbitration and reconciliation 4:35, 4:128; etiquette of divorce 2:229-231, 65:1-2; 
dowry and waiting period 2:226-241, 4:19-21, 33:49, 65:1-7; husband not to take back anything 
of the dowry 4:20; wife not be harassed 65:6; wife to be supported financially during pregnancy 
65:6; during her waiting period 65:6; if she nurses ex-husband’s child, 65:6; no parent should 
suffer because of their child 2:233; opting for wet-nurse 65:6. 

Encouraging good and forbidding evil 3:104, 3:110, 7:157, 9:71-72, 31:17. 

Equality of human beings 49:13; equality between men and women before Allah and the law, 
3:195, 4:124, 5:38, 16:97, 24:2, 40:40; men have a degree of responsibility above women 
2:228. 

Feeding the poor, orphans, and captives 76:8-9. 

Forgiveness and anger control 3:134, 42:40. 

Freeing slaves and helping them 4:92, 5:89, 9:60, 24:33, 58:3, 90:13. 


Honouring one’s own parents 4:36, 17:23-25, 31:14-15. 


Humility 17:37, 31:18-19. 


w Cd 
Ape Ape 


Interpretation of; dreams, of Abraham Ce Je) 37:102; Joseph eee 12:4, 12:36, 12:43; 
" o 3 o 
Muhammad (. A 8:43, 48:27. á ‘ 

Hi 


Kindness to non-Muslims 60:8. 


Marriage 4:3, 4:129, 16:72, 30:21; lawful and unlawful women to marry 4:22-24; etiquette of 
intimacy 2:222-223; pregnancy and nursing 2:233, 31:4, 46:15, 65:6; remarrying one’s own ex- 
wife 2:230; helping singles to marry 24:32; subtly showing interest during the waiting period 
2:235. 


Oaths 2:224-225, 16:91-92, 16:94; making up for a broken oath 5:89. 
Patience in difficult times 2:45, 2:153-157, 3:186, 12:18, 12:83, 16:127-128, 70:5. 


Permission to come in 24:58-60; entering people’s homes 24:27-28; entering public places 
24:29. 


Social etiquette, verifying news 4:83, 49:6; respect for all 49:11-12; etiquette of gatherings 
58:11; private talks 4:114, 58:9. 


Vows 2:270, 9:75-77, 22:29, 76:7. 


Wasting and stinginess 7:31, 17:29, 25:67. 


© STORIES 


Prop! ets (twenty-five mentioned by nam ) 
Aaron (. ; le) with his brother Moses ( ; le) as messengers to Pharaoh and his people 
7:122-172, 10:75, 20:30-92, 21:48, 23:45, 25:35, 26:12-48, 28:34, 37:114-120. 
ak 

Abraham ( . ¥ le) raises the foundations of the Ka’bah 2:124-129; calls his people to the 
worship of the One True God 2:130-132, 26:69-89, 29:16, 29:24-27; debates arrogant king 
2:258, inquires about resurrection 2:260; neither Jew nor Christian 3:65-68; refutes celestial 
worship 6:74-87; receives news of the birth of Isaac 11:69-76, 51:24-30; his prayer at the 
Ka’bah 14:35-41; visited by angels 15:51-56; a role model 16:123; calls his father to the truth 
19:41-50; destroys idols and is saved from the fire 21:51-73, 37:83-113; calls all to the 
pilgrimage 22:26. 


J 

Adam Hep honoured by Allah, tempted by Satan 2:30-38, 7:11-25, 17:61-65, 18:50, 
3 

20:115-123; 58:71-85; forgiven by Allah 2:37, 20:122. 


siia 
David ( e) kills Goliath 2:251; passes a judgment 21:78-79; blessed with knowledge and 
3 
prophethood 27:15-16; mountains and birds join him in praising Allah 34:10, 38:17-20; judges 
between two people 38:21-26. 
alle 
Enoch ( A le) (mentioned passingly) 19:56-57. 
3 o 


4f! 


Elias pena) with his people 37:123-130. 
ae 


Ape 

Elisha ep (mentioned passingly) 6:86, 38:48. 
3 o 
We 


Hid ep with his people 7:65-72, 11:50-60, 26:124-140, 46:21-25. 
3 o 
Le 


Isaac eee) birth and prophethood 2:136, 3:84, 4:163, 6:84, 11:71, 12:6, 37:112-113. 
3 o 


fi f 


Ishmael (. {< Je)» raises foundations of the Ka’bah with his father 2:125-140; story of the 
sacrifice 3!7:100-113. 


J f! 
Jacob (Israel) p as a prophet 3:84, 3:93, 4:163, 6:84; in the story of his son Joseph12:4- 
3 o 
100. 3 
aide 
Jesus ( . {4 Je)» his virgin birth, message, and miracles 3:45-51, 19:16-38; reminded of Allah’s 
3 

favours 5:110-115; no More than a messenger 4:171-172, 5:75, 19:30; created by a word from 
Allah like Adam GE Je) 3:59; honoured in this world and the Hereafter 3:45-46; his mother 
chosen over all women of the world 3:42; denies being divine 5:116-120; Christians asked not 
to deify him 4:171; neither killed nor crucified 4:157; his second coming 43:61; his disciples 
stand up for Allah 3:52, 61:14; compassion and grace in the hearts of his followers 5:82, 57:27. 

alle 
Job (. we)» tested then rewarded 21:83, 38:41-44. 

Hi 

Le 


John the Baptist Fs le) birth and prophethood 3:38-41, 19:7-15, 21:90. 
3 o 


l if f 
4D) swallowed by whale then saved 10:98, 21:87, 37:139-148, 68:48-50. 
3 o 


Z 


Lila 


Jonah ( 


Joseph re ; eA best of stories 12:1-3; young Yusuf’s dream 12:4-6; conspiracy by his 
brothers 12:7-18; sold into slavery 12:19-20; raised in Egypt’s Chief Minister’s house 12:21-22; 
Chief Minster’s wife tries to seduce him 12:23-29; banquet incident 12:30-32; goes to jail 
12:33-35; the two inmates 12:36-42; King’s dream 12:43-53; becomes Chief Minister 12:54-57; 
brothers come to him for supplies 12:58-68; takes his brother Benjamin 12:69-82; his father’s 
renewed grief 12:83-87; reveals his true identity 12:88-98; old dream comes true 12:99-100; 
concluding prayer 12:101. 


4f 


Lot (4 2 mA with his people 7:80-84, 11:77-83, 15:61-74, 21:71-75, 26:160-175, 29:28-35, 
Éj 
37:13B-138, 54:33-39. 


wo 
fi f 


Moses “eat Je)» childhood 20:38-40; 28:7-13; fateful encounter at the burning bush 20:9-36, 
27:7-14; 28:59-35; story with Pharaoh 7:103-137, 10:75-92, 11:96-99, 26:10-68; nine signs for 
Pharaoh and his people 7:130-133, 20:17-22, 17:101; defeats Pharaoh’s magicians 20:70-73, 
26:46-52; kills an Egyptian by mistake 28:14-21; escape to Midian and marriage 28:22-28; 
receives the Tablets 7:142-154, asks to see Allah on the Mount 7:142-145; honoured by Allah 
33:69; Allah ’s favours to Israelites 2:47-61; rebukes his people for calf-worship 7:148-156, 
20:83-99; Israelites refuse to enter Jerusalem 5:20-26. 


wo 
4 [1 f 


Ahd 
Noah (. 21)» mocked 11:38; the Ark and the Flood 7:59-64, 11:25-48, 23:23-31, 26:105-122, 
71:1-28; Kis son drowned 11:42-48. 


4 ah 
Muhammad (. o see DOCTRINE 


siia 


sâlih ep with his people 7:73-79, 11:61-68, 26:142-158, 27:45-53, 91:11-15. 
3 o 


2 (Lz 
Shu'aib ae with his people 7:85-93, 11:84-95, 26:176-191. 


Solomon (. pi rA helps his father David pz A reach a fairer judgment 21:78-82; story with 
the ant 27/1 46- 28; story with the Queen of Sheba 27:22-44; 
Allah’s favours upon him 34:12-14, 38:34-40; his love for fine horses 38:30-33. 


<f9; story with the hoopoe 
2 lhe 
Zachariah (. ies zle) praying for a child 3:37-41, 19:2-12, 21:89-90. 


af! 
Zul-Kifl Fs le) (mentioned passingly) 21:85, 38:48. 
2 o 


Other stories sji 
Abel and Cain 5:27-31; Al-Khadir and Moses eit Je) 18:60-82; Army of the Elephant 
105:1-4; the believer from Pharaoh’s people 40:28-46; birth of Mary 3:35-36; Cow of the 
Children of Israel 2:67-74; Ezra 2:259; garden owners 68:17-32; Hârût and Mârût 2:102; Korah 
28:76:82; Luqman’s advice to his son 31:12-19; owner of the two gardens 18:32-44; people of 
Sheba 34:15-19; people of the cave 18:9-26; people of the trench 85:1-8; Sabbath-breakers 
7:163-165; Samiri and the Golden Calf 20:83-97; Saul and Samuel 2:247-251; Zul-Qarnain 


18:83-98. 


Parables 

Accepted charity 2:265; Allah vs. false gods 13:14, 16:76; associating others with Allah in 
worship 22:31; believers and disbelievers 6:122, 7:58, 11:24, 40:58; believer’s heart 24:35; 
believers’ example in the Torah and Gospel 48:29; charity and grain 2:261; deeds of the 
disbelievers 3:117, 14:18, 24:39; evil word 14:26; good word 14:24-25; fleeting world 10:24, 
18:45, 39:21, 57:20; hardened hearts 57:16-17; hypocrites 2:17-20; misguided scholar 7:175- 
176; monotheist vs. polytheist 39:29; resurrection 7:57, 22:5; 41:39; shepherd and sheep 2:171; 
spider 29:41; truth vs. falsehood 13:17; unbeneficial knowledge 62:5; wasted charity 2:264, 
2:266; wasting the reward of good deeds 16:91-92. 


<£ THE UNSEEN 


Allah, see DOCTRINE 
Angels, see DOCTRINE 


Jinn, created from fire 15:25, 55:15; believing and disbelieving jinn 72:1-15; some believed in 


the message of the Quran 46:29-32; humans and jinn created for a purpose 51:56-58. 


Satan (Iblis), arrogance 2:34, 7:11-27, 15:26-43, 17:61-65, 38:73-85; a jinn 18:50-51; Adam’s 
temptation and fall 7:20-23, 20:116-121; has no authority over the believers 16:98-100; his goal 
35:6-8; a sworn enemy to humanity 12:5, 17:53; his party 53:14-19; his handiwork 5:90-91; 
discourages good deeds 2:268; believers seek refuge in Allah from him 7:200-202; his schemes 
are weak 4:76; lets his followers down 8:48; talk to his followers in Hell 14:22. 


Devils 2:102, 6:71, 6:112, 6:121, 7:27, 7:30, 17:27, 19:68, 19:83, 22:3-4, 23:97-98, 26:210, 
37:7-10, 38:37-38, 67:5; devilish humans and jinn 6:112, 114:6; heaven protected against devils 
15:16-18. 


Death 3:185, 4:78, 6:61, 6:93, 21:35, 23:99-108, 31:34, 32:11, 44:56, 47:27, 50:19-20, 56:60- 
62, 56:83-96, 75:26-35; cannot be stopped or delayed 63:10-11; twin brother of sleep 6:60, 
39:42; believers and disbelievers at the time of death 8:50, 16:27-32, 41:30; punishment in the 
grave 40:46. 


Final Hour, signs 21:96, 27:82, 43:61, 47:18, 54:1-2; names 1:3, 2:4, 3:55, 19:39, 30:56, 37:21, 
40:15, 41:47, 42:7, 50:20, 56:1, 64:9, 69:1, 79:34, 80:33, 88:1, 101:1-3; time known only to 
Allah 7:187, 31:34, 33:63, 79:42-46; fast approaching 54:1; will take people by surprise 6:31, 
7:187; Trumpet will be blown 6:73, 23:101, 39:68. 


Resurrection 2:28, hte? 22:5-7, 23:16, 31:28, 41:39, 64:7; example in the story of Ezra 

2:259, Abraham ae le) 2:260, people of the cave 18:9-26; warning to resurrection deniers 
3 

17:49-52, 17:97-100, 1:66-72, 37:11-27, 50:1-15, 80:17-42. 


Day of Judgment, see DOCTRINE 


Paradise, as vast as the heavens and the earth 3:133, 57:21; running water, cool shade, 
delicacies, and pure mates 2:25, 4:57, 36:55-58, 37:40-49, 38:50-54, 44:51-57, 52:17-24, 69:19- 
24; 76:5-22; reward of the believers 55:46-78, 56:10-40; rivers of honey, milk, water, and wine 
47:15; prayers and greetings 10:9-10, 39:73-74; saluted with greetings of peace 13:23-24, 
14:32; everlasting stay in Bliss 11:108; never asked to leave 15:45-48; light shining ahead of 
them and on their right 57:12; no heat or cold 76:13; all wishes granted 16:30-32, 41:31-32; 
bracelets of gold and clothes of fine silk 18:30-31, 22:23-24, 44:51-53; trays of golden cups 
43:67-73; silver vessels and fruits hanging within reach 76:14-16; reclining on thrones 15:47, 
37:44, 52:20; believers will see their Lord 75:22-23. 


Hell, burning and boiling water 22:19-22, 23:103-104; pus 14:14-17, 38:55-58, 69:35-37; tree 
of Zaqqûm 37:62-70, 44:43-50, 56:41-56; residents’ inability to live or die 87:13; blame 
throwing 26:91-101, 34:31-33; calls for instant destruction 25:13-14, 43:74-78; fervent cries 
35:36-37; Fire growling and roaring 25:11-12, 67:6-11; roasted skins replaced with new ones 
4:56; shackles and clothes of tar 14:48-50; maces of iron 22:19-22; chains 13:5; keepers of Hell 
39:71, 40:49-50, 43:77, 66:6, 67:8, 74:30-31, 96:18; no ransom accepted 5:36-37; intercession 
denied 6:94, 26:100, 30:13, 74:48. 


Regrets, not following the Prophet 25:27; not obeying Allah and His Messenger 4:41-42, 
33:64-68; taking evil friends 25:28-29, 26:96-102, 43:36-39; denying Allah’s signs 6:27-30; not 
working for the Hereafter 89:23-24. 


Desperate pleas, begging for return to the world 2:167, 6:27-28, 32:12-14, 42:44; for a second 
chance 35:36-37; to be removed from the Fire 40:10-12; for food and water 7:51-52; for 
intercessors 7:52-53; to be leveled to dust 4:41-42, 78:40; for death 43:74-78. 


Road to the Hereafter: 
Qualities of the righteous, observing the rights of the Creator and His creation 3:133-136, 
4:36, 4:69-70, 6:151-154, 8:2-4, 13:19-24, 17:23-39, 18:107-108, 23:1-11, 25:63-76, 42:36-43. 


Qualities of the wicked, ungrateful 14:34; stingy 17:100; hasty 21:37; remember Allah only in 
difficult times 10:12, 41:51; impatient 70:19; argumentative 18:54. 


Major Sins, associating others with Allah in worship (shirk) 4:48, 4:116, 5:72, 6:19, 31:13; 
abusing one’s own parents 4:36, 6:151, 17:23; neglecting obligatory prayers 19:59-60; not 
paying alms-tax 41:6-7; murder 6:151, 17:33; killing a believer intentionally 4:93; theft 5:38; 
fraud 7:85, 11:85, 26:182-183, 83:1-6; lying 2:10, 9:77, 39:60; lying about Allah 6:93, 29:68, 
61:7; prohibited sexual relations 2:222, 17:32, 24:2, 25:68, 29:28-30; false accusations of 
adultery 24:4-5; apostasy 2:217, 5:54; eating swine and other forbidden foods (carrion, blood, 
etc.) 5:3, 6:145; alcohol and gambling 5:90-91; backbiting 49:11; false testimony 22:30; magic 
2:102, 10:77, 20:69. 


Doors to forgiveness wide open 4:110, 5:74, 39:53; evil deeds changed into good deeds 25:68- 
71. 
kk 


COMMON QUESTIONS ABOUT ISLAM 


What Is Islam? siig 

Islam did not start with Prophet Muhammad (4147) in the 7" century. 
Technically, Islam ig yhiggmessage that was delin by all the prophets of 
Allah from Adam ( (27) to Muhammad (.(277;). Islam is neither named 
after a person or a ribénor does it end witl{at=ism. Though each prophet 
had a relatively different law, the essence of the message of Islam was 
always the same: have faith in one God and do good. In the Bible, the first 
four of the Ten Commandments enjoin the worship of one God; the rest 
urge believers to avoid what is wrong and to do what is good. All prophets 
and their followers (including Jesus and his disciples) are simply called 
“Muslims” in the Quran. Hence, anyone who submits to Allah and strives to 
be a good person can be called a ‘muslim’ (with a small ‘m’) from a 
linguistic perspective. 


Every human being is born with the innate will (fifrah) to submit to 
Allah, but parents and society change this nature, and in order to relate to 
the Almighty, many have put a face on God (mostly human or animal) 
throughout history. The process of restoring the fitrah is called reversion. 


Islam is not only a religion, but a comprehensive way of life. Based on 
common sense and clear-cut teachings, Islam defines the rights and 
responsibilities of every individual in regards to their relationship with 
Allah and His creation. It balances the spiritual and material needs of its 
followers and helps them gain happiness in this life and salvation in the 
next. 


Who Is a Muslim? 

A ‘Muslim’ (with a capital ‘M’) is someone who practices Islam. Muslims 
follow the five pillars of Islam: 5l tbe 
-Shahddah, testifying that there is only One God and Muhammad (^ {4 zle) 
is His last Prophet a - 

- Salah, praying five times a day 

-Sawm, fasting from dawn to sunset during the month of Ramadan 


-Zakah, paying alms-tax on savings worth 85 g of gold or more, if the 
amount is kept for a year 

-Hajj, performing pilgrimage to Mecca, if physically and financially able 
to. 


Muslims also believe in the six articles of faith: 
-Almighty Allah 

-His angels 

-His prophets 

-His scriptures 

-Free choice, fate, and destiny 

-The Day of Judgment 


Islam is the fastest growing religion in the world. Totalling 1.6 billion, 
Muslims make up one-quarter of the world’s population. Muslims come 
from different ethnic, cultural, and social backgrounds. Contrary to the 
common belief, not all Muslims are Arab; not all Arabs are Muslim. Arabs 
make up less than 18% of the world’s Muslim population. Indonesia (a 
single non-Arab Muslim country in Southeast Asia) has more Muslims than 
all Arab countries combined. 


Islam should not be judged by what any Muslim does, but Muslims 
should be judged based on what Islam teaches. Islam is perfect; Muslims 


are not. if 

Jilg 

Who Is Propheta hammad AS 
ft 


The Prophet ( (2.2) was bornfirt-Mlecca in the year 570 C.E. His father 
died before hie and his mother died when he was six years old Ag he 
grew up, he acquired the epithet ‘the trustworthy.” Muhammad (.{2772) 
had long detested the idolatry, soni injustice, and corruption f Khoo 
society. At the age of forty, he ( fa received the first revelation ofthe 
Quran from Allah through the 4nget Gabriel. Since the Prophet ( (o) 
could not read or write, he had scribes write down passages over thd course 
of their revslatzon. The Quran was also memorized word for word by the 
Prophst (. ele) and many of his companions. Although the Prophet 
( A. zle) erformed many miracles, such as the splitting of the moon (see 


54:1), water gushing out from between his fingers, multiplying food, still 
the Quran is his greatest miracle. iin 
| be 


Just like many previous prophets, Muhammad (.(2772) and his early 
followers were persecuted—and some were even ihe ior advocating 
revolutionary ideas such as social justiga and women’s rights. As the 
persecution grew fierce, the Prophet (.{27[<) and many of his companions 
emigrated to the city of Medina, nap Ae to the north of Mecca. This 
emigration (Hijrah) marks the beginning of the Muslim calendar. After 
seyiiab years, Mecca ultimately surrendered peacefully to Muhammad 
(. ; zle) who issued a mane amnesty. 

“Before the Prophet HS) passed away at the age of sixty-three, the 
greater part of the Arabik ninsula had become Muslim, and within a 
century of his death, Islam had spread to Spain in the west and as far east as 
China. The rapid spread of Islam (especially to territories previously 
occupied by the Byzantine and Persian empires) was mostly because of its 
simple teachings and social justice. 


Why Do Muslims Call God ‘Allah’? 

Arab Muslims, Christians, and Jews call God ‘Allah.’ The word ‘Allah’ is 
unique in the sense that it has no plural or gender. It literally means in 
Arabic “the One, True God.” Allah has many attributes and beautiful names 
such as the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful, the All-Loving, the 
Ju peahe Creator, and the Provider. In his nativeyppgue of Aramaic, Jesus 
(.{2-(<) used Alaha to refer to Allah. Moses (.{< le) used, among other 
t ings, Eloh in Hebrew. Allah, Alaha, and Eloi a from three Semitic 
languages: Arabic, Aramaic, and Hebrew respectively. 


What Is the Quran? 

The Quran is the holy book of Islam. It is a cgl}qegion of revelations that 
were received by the Prophet Muhammad ( {3 zle) over the course of 
twenty-three years in the 7 century C.E. Theat “only one version of the 
Quran, perfectly preserved in written and oral records around the world for 
nearly 1400 years. 


The Quran is the only book in history that has been memorized 
verbatim by millions of people. Sûrahs were written down separately during 
A] 


the life of the Prophet CIEE) and were collected in one volume within 
two years of his death. Katt copies were later duplicated from the original 
collection during the reign of the 3rd Caliph, ’Uthman ibn ’Affan, and sent 
to major Muslim cities. Today, all copies of the Quran (called masâhif, 
plural of mushaf) are perfect duplicates of the original. 


The Quran emphasizes universal ethics such as honesty, sincerity, 
generosity, mercy, and standing up for what is right. It aims at humanizing 
humanity and deifying Allah and therefore condemns those who personify 
Allah and idolize their fellow created beings. 


Was the Quran Copied from the Bible? 

It is worth mentioning that the first Arabic translation of the Bible was done 
centuries after the Prophet’s death. From an Islamic point of view, 
similarities between the Quran and the Bible (especially historical stories 
such as that of Joseph, Moses, and Jesus) stem from the fact that both 
scriptures came originally from the same source—divine revelation. 


Because of differences in transmission and interpretation of the Bible, 
over time the stories changed. The Quranic narratives now appear slightly 
different, for example, unlike the Quran (20:120-122), in the book of 
Genesis, Eve was tempted to eat from the tree and therefore she is to blame 
for the Fall. Also, according to the Quran (Surah 19), prophets are infallible 
of sin. But in the Bible, some prophets are guilty of shameful and even 
criminal acts. For example, David impregnated his neighbour’s wife 
(Bathsheba) before conspiring to get her husband (Uriah) killed (II Samuel 
11:1-27), Lot had sex with his two daughters (Genesis 19:30-38), and Noah 
got drunk and naked (Genesis 9:20-21). 


Some Biblical stories are not in the Quran and vice versa. For 
example, the Biblical story of Isaiah is not in the Quran, while the story of 
Moses and Al-Khadir mentioned in Sirah 18 of the Quran is not in the 
Bible. Also, there are three miracles of Jesus in the Quran that are not in the 
Bible (see 5:110-115). 


Although both scriptures emphasize global ethics (such as dignity, 
kindness, and charity), each revolves around a different theology. Both have 


contrasting views on the perception of Allah, Jesus, salvation, crucifixion, 
and the original sin. 


Is Islam Compatible with Science? 

Although the Quran is a book of signs, not a book of science, there are 
many scientific references in the Quran such as the formation and 
developmental phases of an embryo in the uterus (23:12-—14 and 22:5), the 
Big Bang (21:30), the constant expansion of the universe (51:47-8), 
spherical shape of the earth (39:5 and 79:30), the earth’s rotation (27:88), 
and many others that have become known only in the last two centuries. 


According to an Arab proverb, “The ink of a scholar is holier than the 
blood of a martyr.” Islam’s emphasis on education galvanized learning and 
science in the Muslim world culminating in what is known as the Islamic 
Golden Age. For centuries, Muslims pioneered medicine, anatomy, 
mathematics, geography, astronomy, architecture, and many other sciences. 
Algebra, alchemy, and alcohol are all Arabic words. The Canon of 
Medicine by Avicenna (Ibn Sina, 980-1037 C.E.) was a primary medical 
text in medieval Europe for more than 700 years. Many surgical tools that 
are in use today were invented by Albucasis (Alzahrâwi, 936-1013 C.E.). 
Mariam Al-Astrolabiya, a female Muslim scholar who lived in the 10" 
century in Syria, was famous for designing and constructing astrolabes. 
Arabic numerals (0, 1, 2, 3, etc.) are used worldwide. 


Muslims invented numerous sciences and developed many others 
(which they had inherited from the Romans, Greeks, Persians, Indians, and 
others) and laid the foundations to the European industrial revolution. The 
invention of cameras, computers, and navigation systems could not have 
been possible without the contributions of Muslim scholars. 


What Is Sharia Law? 

Linguistically, Sharia means a pathway. Technically, it is the Muslim law, 
derives mainly from the Quran and the teachings of Prophet Muhammad 
(ola le) governing every aspect of a Muslim’s life. Sharia is made up of 
thotSands of teachings and rulings covering theology, acts of worship, 
manners, human interactions, business transactions, family relations 


(marriage, divorce, inheritance, etc.), war and peace, belief in the unseen 
(Allah, angels, and the Hereafter), and criminal law. 


Sharia mainly aims at protecting 5 things: 1) Life 2) Honour 3) 
Freedom to practice one’s faith 4) Intellect 5) Property. Therefore, there are 
punishments in Islamic Law for violating any of these rights. Every country 
has punishments for offences—even though the penalty for the same crime 
may vary from one country to another. To say that Sharia is all about 
chopping people’s hands off is like saying that the American law is all 
about killing people with the electric chair! Sharia does not apply to non- 
Muslim minorities living in predominantly Muslim countries. Of the fifty- 
seven Muslim countries in the world, the great majority are secular, not 
Sharia-based. 


Muslims living in the West follow the law of the land and maintain 
Sharia mainly in personal matters (such as prayers, marriage, and 
inheritance). Sharia also forbids the consumption of pork, alcohol, and 
drugs. Smoking is frowned upon. 


Is Islam Compatible with Modern Democracy? 

We have to make the distinction between what Islam teaches and how 
countries in the Muslim world are run. As pointed out earlier, many Muslim 
countries are secular-based, not fully subscribing to Islamic morals or 
western democratic values. Islam and modern democracies have many 
things in common. For example, the fundamental principles in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights are acceptable Islamically. What 
makes Islamic values unique is that they do not change over time, what is 
right in the sight of Allah is always right and what is wrong is always 
wrong. On the other hand, many secular freedoms (which have been mostly 
adopted in the last few decades) are still subject to debate in western 
societies. For example, marijuana, same-sex marriage, abortion, incest, and 
prostitution are legal in some democracies and illegal in some others. The 
same applies to euthanasia and the death penalty. Moreover, in a secular 
society, the majority’s opinion prevails. In the Islamic concept of shûra, the 
truth prevails even if it is held by a minority. For example, the segregation 
of blacks and whites under the Jim Crow Laws would be prohibited under 
Sharia, since discrimination based on colour goes against Islamic beliefs. 


Does Jihad Equal Terrorism? 

Life is sacred in Islam. The Quran (5:32) states, “Whoever takes a life ..., it 
will be as if they killed all of humanity; and whoever saves a life, it will be 
as if they saved all of humanity.” Those who manipulate verses from the 
Quran by taking them out of context to justify violence against innocents 
contradict the Quran’s call for tolerance and peaceful co-existence. Islam is 
unequivocally against terrorism (see 5:33). 


Jihad means to strive for a better, more righteous life. The major, jibad 
is to overcome one’s desires (such as greed). Prophet Muhammad ( . |< le) 
says, “The highest form of jihad is to speak a word of truth in the ra ce 
of a tyrant,” “Kindness to parents is a form of jihad,” and “Charity to 
orphans and wi oes is jihad.” The minor jihad is fighting in self-defence. 
The Prophet (.{27 |<) set the etiquettes of fighting as follows: “Do not ask 
Allah to meet/ydéér enemies in battle” and “Do not start a war. If you must 
fight, then strike only at those "combatants" who attacked you. Do not attack 
women, children, the elderly, or those retreating in their places of worship. 
Do not cut down trees or kill animals.” 


We have to keep in mind that all violent passages in the Quran 
(including verses in sûrahs 2, 8, 9, 47, and 48) strictly concern conflicts 
between early Muslims and the pagans of Mecca over 1400 years ago. As 
such, all passages should be understood in their historical context. In Islam, 
fighting is allowed against aggressors regardless of their faith. Fighting 
against innocents is prohibited regardless of their faith. Overall, violent 
passages in the Quran talk about one of three things: 

-Fighting back in self-defence. 
-Making peace if attackers cease. 
-Or resuming the fight if a truce is violated. 


What is the Origin of Religious Violence? 

No religion condones the killing of innocents, but some people manipulate 
religion to justify acts of violence. So, even if Islam and other faiths have 
never existed, humans would have come up with other excuses to fight for 
domination. We have seen notorious anti-religion, secularist ideologies, like 
those championed by Mao and Stalin (the top mass murderers in modern 


history), which were responsible for over seventy million deaths in the 20" 
century. 


Most victims of violence in the Muslim world are Muslims, who are 
either killed by unjustified wars, suicide bombs, or drone attacks. Over the 
last few decades, hundreds of thousands have been killed—most of them 
civilians—and many others wounded or displaced. Justice, dignity, and 
education, some of the most fundamental aspects of human rights, are the 
key to peace and prosperity anywhere in the world. 


Are Women Abused in Islam? 

The Quran makes it clear that men and women are equal before Allah and 
the Law (16:97 and 33:35). Abuses against some Muslim women (e.g., 
honour killing and forced marriages) are cultural practices in some Muslim 
countries that contradict Islamic teachings. 


There are many prominent Muslim women in every field: education, 
science, business, etc. Several Muslim women have been elected president 
and prime minister in Muslim-majority countries like Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Bangladesh, and Turkey. The high status of women in Islam explains why 
75% of reverts to Islam are women. 


Why Do Muslim Women Wear the Hijab? 

The veil is deeply rooted in all Abrahamic traditions. Christian icons such 
as Mary and Mother Teresa areyilivays depicted with veils. In the Quran and 
the teachings of the Prophet ( .(27{-), both men and women are urged to be 
modest in their dress and behfviéur. Hijab is worn by adult Muslim women 
in the presence of adult males outside of their immediate family. 


What Are the Rights of Non-Muslims in Islam? 

Islam guarantees the freedom of non-Muslims to pr dive their faith and 
protection for their places of worship. The Prophet ( {%2 ) said, “Whoever 
harms a non-Muslim under the protection of Islam, Chat be their opponent 
on Judgment Day and they will not even smell Paradise.” The Quran 
teaches that there are three types of brotherhood: brotherhood in humanity 
(this includes all human beings), biological brotherhood (one’s siblings), 
and brotherhood in faith (fellow Muslims). 


Islam allows giving charity to non-Muslims and exchanging gifts and 
visits with them. The Quran (60:8-9) exhorts Muslims to be kind and 
generous to non-Muslims. It forbids forcing non-Muslims to convert to 
Islam (2:256). For centuries, non-Muslim communities thrived under 
Muslim rule. Many Christians and Jews occupied prominent positions in the 
courts of some Muslim caliphs, serving as translators, physicians, and 
architects. 


Do Muslims Believe in Other Prophets? 

The Quran mentions twenty-five prophets by name—of whom five are 
given the honorary title of ‘the Messengers of Firm Resolve,’ namely 
Abraham, Noah, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad. The Quran (12:111) says, 
“In their stories there is truly a lesson for people of reason.” Some of the 
most common names in the Muslim world include ’Isa (Jesus in Arabic), 
Misa (Moses), Mariam (Mary), Yûsuf (Joseph), and Ibrahim (Abraham). 
Jesus is mentioned by name in the Quran twenty-five times, Mary thirty- 
one times (compared to eighteen times in the Bible), whereas Prophet 
Muhammad is mentioned by name only four times. Sirah 19 of the Quran 
is named after Mary. Muslims believe that Jesus is the Christ and the 
Messiah. They also believe in his virgin birth, ascension, and second 
coming. 


Below is a list of all the prophets mentioned by name in the Quran, each 
followed by transliteration of the corresponding Arabic name: 


1. Aaron ... Hârûn 

2. Abraham ... [brahim 
3. Adam ... Adam 

4. David ... Dawtid 

5. Elias ... Ilyds 

6. Elisha ... Al-Yasa’ 

7. Enoch ... Idris 

8. Hiid ... Hûd 

9. Isaac ... Ishaq 


10. Ishmael ... Isma’il 
11. Jacob ... Ya’qutib 
12. Jesus ...’fsa 


13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 


25 


Job ... Aiytib 

John the Baptist ... Yahya 
Jonah ... Yiinus 

Joseph ... Yûsuf 

Lot... Lut 

Moses ... Mûsa 
Muhammad ... Muhammad 
Noah ... Nah 

Salih ... Salih 


Shu’ aib ... Shu’aib 

Solomon ... Sulaiman 

Zachariah ... Zakariya 
. Zul-Kifl ... Zul-Kifl 


As the Quran teaches Muslimiganot to exalt one prophet over others (2:285), 


it is customary to 


say ( {3 16 ) “peace be upon him” when the name of 
tidfred. 


any of the prophets is me 


KK K 


SELECT TEACHINGS OF Sie PROPHET MUHAMMAD 

( a zde) 
On the Environment and Animal Rights 
“If Judgment Day arrives and you have a seedling in your hand, plant it 
regardless” 5 ri% “Don’t waste water even if you live by a river.” The 
Prophet ( {%4 i2) prohibited polluting water sources and promised a 
heavenly eward for planting trees to feed animals, birds, and humans. He 
taught that a good deed done to an animal is like a good deed done to a 
human being, while an act of cruelty to an animal is as bad as cruelty to a 
human being. He prohibited the use of live birds and animals as a target for 
arrows, the killing of animals for sport, slaughtering an animal in front of 
other animals, and forbade overburdening animals and underfeeding them. 


On the Treatmgnt of Others 
The Prophet (.{2-(<) said that smiling is a charity and taught: “They are 
not of us, hotte o do not show respect to our seniors or show mercy to 
our youngsters.” He gave women the right to inheritance, education, to own 
property, and have a say in marriage and said, “The best among the 
believers are those who are best to their wives,” and that Paradise lies under 
the feet of the.mother. 

wie pe date 
He (.{e-[<) received Christians in his mosque and allowed them to 
pray there en the time for their prayers came. He also commemorated the 
day Moses and the Children of Israel were saved from Pharaoh and his 
army by fasting and ordering Muslims to fast—a practice that has continued 
until today. 


pe 

He ( (%12) said, “O humanity! Your Lord is one and your ancestry 
[i.e., Adaf affd Eve] is one. No Arab is superior to a non-Arab and no non- 
Arab is superior to an Arab, nor is any white superior to any black or any 
black superior to any white except on account of their piety,” and “None of 
you truly believes until they love for others what they love for themselves.” 


On the Best Way of Life 
alló 


The Prophet CIETE) set out a way of life through his own example, but he 
also had the follwing to say on living a fulfilling life. “The ‘true’ Muslim 
is the one who does not harm people with his hands or tongue.” “Seeking 
knowledge is an obligation on every Muslim.” “Don’t respond to evil by 
evil, but by doing what is good.” “Show mercy to those on earth and Allah 
will show mercy to you.” 


“Take advantage of five matters before the coming of five things: your 
health before you fall sick, your wealth before you become poor, your free 
time before you become busy, your youth before you become old, and your 
life before your death.” 


“Be mindful of Allah and He will always be with you. Remember 
Allah in times of prosperity and He will remember you in times of 
adversity. And know that what has passed you by [and you have failed to 
attain] was not going to befall you, and what has befallen you was not going 
to pass you by. And know that victory comes with perseverance, relief with 


affliction, and ease with hardship.” 
ok KK 


“file 
WHAT THEY SAID ABOUT MUHAMMAD ee 
Ia 
“My choice of Muhammad to lead the list of the world's most influential 
persons may surprise some readers and may be questioned by others, but he 
was the only man in history who was supremely successful on both the 

religious and secular levels.” 
--Michael H. Hart, The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential 
Persons in History, New York, 1978, p. 33. 


“In all things Muhammad was profoundly practical. When his beloved son 
Ibrahim died, an eclipse occurred, and rumours of God's personal 
condolence quickly arose. Whereupon Muhammad announced, ‘An eclipse 
is a phenomenon of nature. It is foolish to attribute such things to the death 
or birth of a human being.’” 
--James A. Michener, “Islam: The Misunderstood Religion,” in 
Reader ’s Digest, May 1955. 


“I have studied Muhammad-the wonderful man, and in my opinion, he 
must be called the Savior of Humanity. I believe that if a man like him were 
to assume the leadership of the modern world, he would succeed in solving 
its problems in a way that would bring it much needed peace and 
happiness.” 
--George Bernard Shaw, The Genuine Islam, Singapore, Vol. 1, No. 
8, 1936. 


“I became more than ever convinced that it was not the sword that won a 
place for Islam in those days in the scheme of life. It was the rigid 
simplicity, the utter self-effacement of the Prophet, the scrupulous regard 
for pledges, his intense devotion to his friends and followers, his intrepidity, 
his fearlessness, his absolute trust in God and in his own mission. These and 
not the sword carried everything before them and surmounted every 
obstacle.” 
--Mahatma Gandhi, Young India, 1924. 


KKK 


ENDNOTES 


MI ie., Lord of everything in existence including angels, humans, and 
animals. 

2] Tt is customary to say “Amin” or “Amen” at the end of this sûrah. 

[3] See Stylistic Features for information about these letters. 

[4] i.e., there is no doubt regarding its authenticity or consistency. 

[3] The word muttagi (plural muttaqûn) can be translated as one who is 
mindful ‘of Allah’, devout, pious, God-fearing, righteous, or God- 
conscious. 

[6] i.e., the belief in Allah, the angels, and the Day of Judgment. 

[Z] See Notes on Translation for information about the use of "O Prophet’. 

[8] When they were criticized for their close association with the pagans who 
were hostile to Muslims, they would argue that they only wanted to make 
peace between Mpggms and their enemies. 

[9] Muhammad (4 oe): 

[10] Residents of giae will be in a perfect condition. There will be neither 
physical impurities such as illness, urination, defecation, or menstruation; 
nor spiritual blemishes such as jealousy, envy, or hatred. 

[11] Allah knew that there would be many righteous people who would do 
good, make peace, and stand up for justice. Since humans have free 
choice, whoever chooses to believe and do good is better in the sight of 
Allah than all other beings, and whoever chooses to disbelieve and do evil 
is worse than all other beings. See 98:6-8. 

(121 Tf you are true that Allah will never create anyone who is more 
honourable and knowledgeable than you. 

[13] Prostration in this verse does not mean worship, but an act ofyyeppect. A 
similar occurrence can be found in Surah 12, where Gea zle) his 
wife, and his eleven children knelt down before Joseph ( . {27 I 

[14] Tblîs was the name of Satan before his fall from grac¢. T6fis was not an 
angel, but one of the jinn (see 18:50). Jinn are another creation of Allah, 


similar to humans in that they—unlike angels—have free will, but are 
made of smokeless fire and live in another plane of existence. 

[15] The command to prostrate was a test of obedience. Satan arrogantly 
refused to comply because he believed he was superior to Adam—arguing 
that Adam was made of mud while Satan was made of fire (see 7:12). 

[16] Both Adam and Eve were deceived, both sinned, and both were later 
forgiven. There is no concept of original sin in Islam. 

[17] ie., humans and Satan. 

[18] The prayer that Adam and Eve were inspired to say is mentioned in 7:23, 
“Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If You do not forgive us and have 
mercy on us, we will certainly be losers.” 

[19] Israel is another name for Prophet Jacob. 

[20] This refers to the passages in the Torah and the Gospel that call for the 
worship of the One True God, doing what is good, and avoiding what is 
evil. 

[21] Trading Allah’s revelations for a fleeting gain is a recurring theme in the 
first few sûrahs of the Quran. This refers to the practice of some Jewish 
authorities in Medina who contradicted certain rulings in the Torah by 
giving people lenient opinions only to please them in exchange for money. 

[22] The alms-tax (zakGh) is the payment of 2.5% of someone’s savings only 
if the amount is equivalent to or greater than 85 g of gold, if that amount 
remains untouched for a whole Islamic year—around 355 days. 

[23] Meaning, I chose you above all peoples of your time. 

[24] “Intercession” is the act of pleading with Allah on behalf of another 
person on the Day of Judgment. 

[25] Manna (heavenly bread) and quails (chicken-like birds) sustained the 
children of Israel in the wilderness after they left Egypt. 

[26] The Sabians are an indigenous group that believes in a supreme being 
and lives mostly in Iraq. 

[27] This verse should be understood in light of 3:19 and 3:85. For more 
details, see the Introduction. 

[28] Although many scholars believe that these individuals were turned into 
real apes, others interpret this verse in a metaphorical sense. This style is 


not uncommon in the Quran. See 62:5 regarding the donkey that carries 
books and 2:18 regarding the deaf, dumb, and blind. 

[29] This stirah is nayngd after the cow in this story, which happened at the 
time of Moses ( .{< le): A rich man was killed by his nephew, his only 
heir, and the bodf Was thrown at the door of an innocent many Ager a long 
investigation, no one was identified as the killer. Moses (.(27|<) prayed 
for guidance and was told that the only way to find Ya er was to 
sacrifice a cow and strike the victim with a piece of it. When this was 
done, the victim spoke miraculously and said who the kijfgvas. 

[30] i e., verses prophesizing the coming of the Prophet (414 le) in the Torah 
(including Deuteronomy 18:15-18 and 33:2). as ° 

31] je., warning of a curse or punishment. 

[32] The indigenous people of Medina were divided into two warring groups: 
Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj. Some Jewish tribes were allied with the former 
and others with the latter, which meant that in times of war each of these 
Jewish tribes had to fight along with theix | dipes against their enemies, 
including other Jews. When the Prophet ( .{< le) migrated to Medina, he 
brought about a lasting peace in the city. os. . 

[33] The holy spirit is Gabriel, a mighty angel created from light, whose main 
duty is to communicate Allah’s messages to prophets. 

[34] Their hearts are unreceptive because they claim they have enough 
knowledge already. 

[35] Jit., the disbelievers. 

[36] i.e., the Quran. 

[37] i.e., disobeying Allah, killing some of the prophets (including Zachariah 
and John the Baptist), claiming to have killed Jesus, accusing Mary of 
adultery, and dealing with usury. See 4:153-158. 

[38] The two angels, Hârût and Marit, were sent to enlighten the people in 
Babylon so they would not confuse magic tricks with miracles. Still some 
people abused this knowledge, causing mischief in the land. These 
practices persisted until the time of Solomon, who himself was falsely 
accused of utilizing magic to run his kingdom, subdue the jinn, and control 
the wind. 

[39] Some of the sligpelievers used to play with words when they addressed 
the Prophet (.{2-[¢) in order to ridicule him. So instead of saying, ra’ina 


“listen to us,’ they would say, ra’ina “our shepherd” or “the foolish among 
us.” They would say loudly, “We listen,” then whisper, “but we disobey!” 
and say, “Hear us,” then, “may you never hear!” They used to say to each 
other, “If he had truly been a prophet of Allah, he would have known that 
we are mocking him.” Therefore, this verse (along with 4:46) was revealed 
commanding the believers to avoid such words altogether. Better words 
are recommended. 

[40] The Quran was revealed over a period of twenty-three years. New rules 
were introduced when the believers were ready to accept and apply them. 
Replacing a ruling with another is called abrogation (naskh). For example, 
alcohol consumption was forbidden over three stages (see 2:219, 4:43, and 
5:90, respectively). Some of the Prophet’s companions said, “If drinking 
had been forbidden from day one, no one would have accepted Islam!” 

[41] i.e., asking to make Allah visible to them and make the angels talk to 
them. 

[42] Or “Such people should not have even entered these places except with 
reverence.” 

[43] lit., wherever you turn, there is the Face of Allah. 

[44] His mercy and knowledge covers all. 
[45] The Christians, pagans, etc. 

[46] Jesus in Christianity, the angels in pagan Arab mythology, etc. 

[47] “The Sacred House” (Ka’bah) is a cube-shaped building in Mecca, 
Islam’s holiest sanctuary, which Muslims face when they pray five times a 
day. 

[48] «The standing-place of Abraham” is the stone on which Abraham stood 
while he was building the Ka’bah. 

[49] lit., make both of us Muslims. The word “Muslim” means “one who 
submits to Allah.” All of the prophets submitted to Allah and were, 
therefore, Muslims. 

[30] For about sixteen months after daily prayers became obligatory, Muslims 
used to face towards Jerusalem before the order came to face a new qiblah 
(direction of prayer)—the Sacred Mosque in Mecca. 

[51] i.e., moderate, balanced, and outstanding. 

[52] Safa and Marwah are two hills near the Ka’bah in Mecca. 


[53] Known as hajj and ’umrah to the Sacred Mosque in Mecca. 

[54] Eating pork is forbidden in the Old Testament in Leviticus 11:7-8 and 
Deuteronomy 14:8. 

[55] The closest heirs of the victim of an intentional killing have the right to 
demand the execution of the killer through legal channels. They also have 
the right to waive the punishment as an act of charity. 

[36] No one else should be executed in place of the killer. This verse was 
revealed regarding a particular incident. Nevertheless, the killer is killed 
regardless of the difference in gender or status, unless the victim’s family 
opts for blood money. 

[57] The guardian is the victim’s closest heir—male or female. 

[58] Or according to common law. 

[59] This ruling should be understood in light of the inheritance laws in 4:11- 
12, which give specific shares to parents and close relatives. Relatives who 
do not have a share may get a bequest up to one third of the estate. 

[60] After the death of the one who made the will. 

[61] je. the followers of previous prophets. 
[62] i e., the month of Ramadan, the 9th month in the Islamic calendar. 
[63] Ty the case of old age or chronic disease. 

[64] “Garment” (libds) is a metaphor for comfort, chastity, and protection. 

[65] Initially, intimate relations during the night of Ramadan were not 
permissible. Since some Muslims could not resist not having intercourse 
with their spouses, this verse was revealed allowing intimacy during the 
nights preceding the fast. 

[66] This implies offspring. 

[67] Before Islam, there was a superstitious practice for pilgrims to enter their 
homes through the back door upon returning from the pilgrimage. The 
verse suggests that being devoted to Allah wholeheartedly is more 
important than blindly following old traditions. 

[88] “Do not exceed the limits” refers to Islamic warfare guidelines SEDI the 
Prophet. In an authentic saying collected by Abu Dawid, he ( (%12) is 
reported to have instructed the Muslim army, “Depart in the(/N4me of 
Allah and with His help—following the way of the Messenger of Allah. 
Do not kill an old man, a child, or a woman. Do not mutilate dead bodies 


of the enemy. Be gracious andi gourteous, for Allah loves those who act 
with grace.” The Prophet ( .{%_ 2) also says, “Do not wish to meet your 
enemy in battle but always (pray for well-being. If fighting is a must, then 
be steadfast.” 

[69] This is probably the most misquoted verse from the Quran. To properly 
understand the verse, we need to put it into context. Misquoting verses and 
taking them out of context can be applied to any scripture. For example, in 
the Bible, Jesus says, “Do not think that I came to bring peace on earth. I 
did not come to bring peace but a sword!” (Matthew 10:34). He also says, 
“But as for these enemies of mine who did not want me to be their king— 
bring them here and slaughter them in my presence!” (Luke 19:27). And 
Moses says, “The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.” (Exodus 
15:3). For more details, see the Introduction. 

[20] Persecuting Muslims to abandon their faith. 

[Z1] The sacred months are the 15‘, 7, 112, and 12™® months of the Islamic 
calendar. 

[22] Hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, is required at least once in a Muslim’s 
lifetime if they are physically and financially able to. ° Umrah, which is a 
short version of hajj, is recommended, but not obligatory. 

[23] Although pilgrimage is performed over the course of a few days in the 
12" month of the Islamic calendar, the intention to perform pilgrimage can 
be made during the 10", 11", and the first half of the 12" months. 

[74] By trading during hajj season. 

[Z5] > Arafat is a hill in Saudi Arabia, near Mecca, which is visited during 
pilgrimage. 

[26] A sacred place called Muzdalifah. 

[Z7] Swift in reckoning (sarf’ul-hisdb) means “He is quick in recording the 
deeds and judging them.” 

[78] The 11-13 of Zul-Hijjah, the 12 month of the Islamic calendar. 
These days are part of pilgrimage rituals. 

[79] Another possible translation: “And when they assume authority, they 
Strive ...” 

[80] The pagans of Mecca. 

[81] See footnote for 2:194. 


[82] Persecuting Muslims to abandon their faith. 

[83] While many traditional scholars maintain that apostates are to be first 
invited to re-enter the fold of Islam then executed if the invitation is turned 
down, some traditional and modern scholars (like Sufyan Ath-Thawri, the 
late Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Sheikh Mahmid Shaltiit, and Dr. Jamal 
Badawi) are of the opinion that the Quran (2:256) guarantees freedom of 
religion and (2:217) promises no worldly punishment for leaving Islam. It 
is reportedyin|g Hadith collected by Imam Muslim that a man came to the 
Prophet f; z) in Medina and retracted the allegiance he had pledged to 
him ( (4. (7)j*-leaving Islam. The Prophet (.{27{<) did not punish the 
man. Hehe that command the Kilingi “apostates refer only to 
those who fight against Muslims—so they are killed for treason, not for 
apostasy. Other ahddith are meant to deter those who conspired to accept 
Islam then leave it soon after only to shake the faith of early Muslims, as 
mentioned in 3:72. 

[84] See footnote for 4:43. 

[85] Literal translation, “They are your brothers.” 

[86] By not allowing partnership between you and orphans. 
[87] lit., “by His permission.” 

[88] Do not have intercourse with them until their menstruation is over and 
they have taken a full bath. 

[89] Harth means “farmland”—the husband being like a farmer, the wife like 
productive land, and children like seeds—a metaphor for fertility and 
growth. 

[90] Tt is permissible to have intimate relations in any position, however anal 
sex is impermissible. Vaginal penetration during monthly cycles, or while 
bleeding persists after childbirth, up to forty days, is also not permitted. 

[91] This can either imply “sending forth good deeds that will be rewarded in 
the next life’ or—according to some interpretations—“engaging in 
foreplay with one’s spouse before intercourse.” 

[92] This ruling is called ilâ'. Ilâ' means that a husband vows not to be 
intimate with his wife because of a dispute or any other legitimate reason. 
The verse here says if it is four months or less and the husband keeps his 
vow, then he does not have to make up for breaking his vow (by feeding 
ten poor people, or fasting three days), otherwise he will need to make up 


for breaking his vow. If the vow is made for over four months, the wife 
has the right to seek divorce after four months. Tlâ' should be avoided 
altogether since it deprives the wife of her right to sexual satisfaction. 
Instead, counselling is a better alternative at the time of dispute. 

[93] This could mean “pregnancy” or “accurate information about monthly 
cycles.” 

[94] A husband may separate from his wife after each of the first two counts 
of divorce or at the end of her waiting period (see 65:1-5) with dignity. If 
he chooses to stay with her after the first two counts of divorce then 
divorces her a third time, the marriage is terminated at the end of her third 
waiting period. The wife will have to marry and divorce another man 
before she can be remarried to her ex-husband (see 2:230). However, a 
woman marrying someone with the intention of getting divorced, in order 
to return to her first husband, is forbidden. 

[95] The “limits of Allah” implies fidelity to one’s spouse according to 
Allah’s commands. 

[96] If the wife does not want to continue in the marriage for legitimate 
reasons, then she can return the dowry (mahr) to the husband in 
compensation for divorce. This ruling is called khul’. al tbe 

[97] “Wisdom” means the “sunnah” or the tradition of the Prophet (414 zle) 
when it is mentioned along with the Book (i.e., the Quran). as . 

[98] i e., the guardians. 
[99] During their waiting periods. 

[100]. The passage that discusses prayer falls between the passages that 
discuss divorce and women’s rights after divorce because it serves as a 
reminder that prayers should motivate spouses to always be mindful of 
their Lord during their marriage and also after divorce so no one will be 
wronged in anyway. 

101] Apd entioned in several authentic sayings of Prophet Muhammad 

(ol zle) the middle prayer is the afternoon prayer, ’Asr. 
noaea ruling was later replaced by the ruling in 2:234. 

[103] They fled in the wake of a plague or an enemy attack. 

[104] Talat, 

[105] Reassurance refers to the Torah. 


[106] ie., the staff of Moses and fragments of the Tablets. 

[107] Those messengers mentioned earlier in this sûrah (see verse 136). 
[108] i e., Gabriel. 
[109] This implies ransoming one’s self. 
[110] ie., friendly connections. 

1} The Arabic word kursi can either mean seat or knowledge. There are 
some narrations attributed to Prophet Muhammad (^ {4 zle) that describe 
Allah’s Throne (’Arsh) as being greater than His Kure ” 

112] According to Muslim belief, this is the greatest verse in the Quran. 

113] This verse was revealed when some new Muslims tried to force their 
Jewish and Christian children to convert to Islam after the Prophet’s 
emigration (Hijrah) to Medina. The verse prohibits forced conversion. 

[114] Bringing the donkey back to life. 

15] It could also mean “... seeking Allah’s pleasure and proving their 
sincerity.” 

116] Donations for a public cause may be done openly to encourage others to 
donate, whereas it is recommended to give charity to the poor secretly. 

[117] lit., seeking the Face of Allah. 

118] Verse 281 is believed by many scholars to be the last verse revealed of 
the Quran. 

19] Generally speaking, there is a difference between witnessing and giving 
testimony before a judge. Verse 2:282 talks about witnessing a debt 
contract, not giving testimony. To fully understand the context of this 
verse, we need to keep in mind that 1500 years ago women did not 
normally participate in business transactions or travel with trading 
caravans and, therefore, not every woman had the expertise to witness a 
debt contract. Even if two women were available at the time of signing 
the contract, perhaps the primary witness might not be able to recall the 
details of the contract or appear before a judge because of compelling 
circumstances such as pregnancy or delivery. In any of these cases, the 
second woman will be a back-up. Some scholars maintain that one 
woman can be sufficient as a witness so long as she is reliable. As for 
giving testimony, a ruling can be made based on available testimony, 
regardless of the number or gender of the witnesses. For example, the 


beginning of Ramadan is usually confirmed by the sighting of the new 
moon, regardless of the gender of the person who sights the moon. Also 
the highest form of witness in Islam is for spingone to testify they heard a 
narration (or hadith) from the Prophet (< (272). An authentic hadith is 
accepted by all Muslims regardless fie gender of the narrator. 
Moreover, if a husband accuses his wife of adultery and he has no 
witnesses, each spouse must testify five times that they are telling the 
truth and the other side is lying. Both testimonies are equal (see 24:6-10). 
In some cases, only women’s testimony is accepted while men’s 
testimony is rejected, such as testifying regarding a woman’s pregnancy 
or virginity. 

120] The Standard (Al-Furgdn) is one of the names of the Quran. 

121] The precise verses are easy to understand and deal mostly with matters 
of belief and practice, such as the belief in one God (Sdrah 112), 
forbidden foods (see 5:3), and the commandments in 6:151-152 and 
17:23-39. As for the elusive verses, their full meaning is known only to 
Allah, such as the meaning of letter combinations at the beginning of 
some sûrahs, such as Alif-Ladm-Mim (see Stylistic Features), and how 
Allah settles Himself on the Throne. 

122] Wealth and children were considered the most important things in pre- 
Islamic Arabia, and so the frequent mention of these things in the Quran 
is meant to represent all worldly gains. 

123] Badr is the name of the location where the Muslim army and the pagan 
army of Mecca fought in 2 A.H./624 C.E. The Muslim army was made 
up of over 300 soldiers whereas the pagan army was over 1000. 

124] Tt can also be understood that the disbelievers were made to think there 
were twice as many believers in the battlefield. 

125] Banin means sons. In the ancient Arab culture, sons were a source of 
pride for their parents and tribes. This is because they provided for their 
families and took up arms in defence of their tribes. 

[126] See footnote for 2:25. 

127] Optional prayers before dawn are recommended and are more likely to 
be accepted. 

[128] i e., full submission to the Will of Allah. 


129] No community split into believers and disbelievers until they received 
the knowledge given by their prophet. 

[130] This refers to the pagans of Arabia before Islam. 

[131] i.e., the Torah. 

132] Like 4:139 and 4:144, this verse forbids the believers from taking the 
disbelievers who were at war with Muslims as strategic allies. 

[133] į e., dedicating the child to service in the temple. 

[134] Service at the temple was hosted by males only. 

135] The prayers of Mary’s mother werg,pgwered. In a hadith collected by 
Bukhari and Muslim, the Prophet (. {< le) says, “Every child is touched 
by Satan when they are bom- anf Ae cry because of this contact— 
except Jesus and his mother.” 

136] Ty the Quran, Jesus is called the “Word” of Allah since he was created 
with the word “Be!” 

137] Messiah (Masih) means the “anointed one.” It is used in the Quran 

exclusively as a title for Jesus Christ. 

‘Mutawaffika’ means literally: “I will make you reach the end of your 
worldly term.” The popular Muslim belief is that a conspiracy was made 
to kill Jesus. Allah made the main culprit who betrayed Jesus look 
exactly like Jesus, while the culprit was crucified, Similar to Christians, 
Muslims believe in the second coming of Jesus ( .{< zle): 

[139] As a testament to your proppiigcod. w n 

[140] The ion’ af J A be 

perceptio a esus ( i zle): 

(141) Abraham (14T) being fieWrsh or Christian. 

142] Linguistic ly “Muslim” means “someone who has submitted 
themselves to Allahi 


Add 
le) 


138] 


[143] Muhammad (^ (4 
[144] “Gentiles” hefeféfers 
[145] Ah pa 
“2! Muhammad ( (a2) 
[146] i e., full subm{sston to the Will of Allah. 


147) Their repenfare will not be accepted if they die as disbelievers. 


to the pagans of Arabia. 


Aid 
[148] Jacob (12T) 


149] When Jaflob tell sick, he made camel meat unlawful for himself, but not 
for the rest of his people. 


150] Pilgrimage is obligatory on every Muslim at least once in their lifetime if 
the person is physically and financially able. 

151] Meaning, always be conscious of Him; obedient and grateful to Him. 

[152] lit., except as Muslims. 
[153] i.e., Allah’s covenant. 
[154] i.e., they can only annoy you with their words. 

1551 Uhud is the name of the location where a battle took place in 3 
A.H./625 C.E. between 750 Muslims and 3700 Meccans. This battle 
came only a year after the Meccan army was defeated at the Battle of 
Badr by the vastly outnumbered Muslim army. Initially, Muslims were 
winning the second battle. However, events took a different turn when the 
archers, who had been positioned by the Prophet on the mount of Uhud, 
left their strategic position in pursuit of spoils of war—allowing a 
surprise attack by the Meccan cavalry. Many Muslims were martyred and 
Prophet Muhammad himgglt was injured. 

156] When the Prophet (4: "(.) was injured at the Battle of Uhud, some of 
his companions sages that he should pray against the pagans of 
Mecca. He responded, “I have not come to condemn people, but as a 
mercy to pray for their guidance.” The verse here says that it is not up to 
the Prophet whether they believe or disbelieve. A prophet’s only duty is 
to convey the message. Eventualjy{ almost all Meccans accepted Islam 
before the death of the Prophet ( .{277:). 

157] “This” either refers to how the forées of evil are ultimately destroyed, or 
that the Quran is a reminder of the destruction of evildoers. 

158] The faith of many Muslims sas shaken when the pagan army spread 
rumours that Muhammad (< (27/2) was killed in the Battle of Uhud. 

159] The archers disputed wh ther to keep their positions after the initial 
victory. Eventually, most of them decided to go in pursuit of the spoils of 
war, disobeying the Prophet’s direct orders not to leave their position no 
matter what happened. Defeat became inevitable. 

[160] j e., the hypocrites. 
[161] je, try not to shahen your time comes. 

162] The Prophet eae le) realized that the city of Medina became vulnerable 
after the Musli at Uhud. So on the next day of the battle he decided 


to lead a small force of his companions—many of whom had been 
wounded at Uhud—to chase away the Meccan army which was camping 
at a place called Hamra' Al-Asad—not far from Medina. Abu Sufyan, 
commander of the Meccan army, sent a man to discourage the Muslims 
from following the Meccans. Although the man falsely claimed that the 
Meccans were mobilizing to launch a decisive attack on Medina, the 
Prophet became more determined to chase them away. Eventually, the 
Meccans decided to flee and not waste their victory after the Prophet sent 
a revert to Islam—who was friends with Abu Sufyan—to convince him 
to withdraw; otherwise Muslims were going to avenge their loss at Uhud. 
163] This refers to the warning mentioned in 3:173. 
164] i e., the distinction between the true believers and hypocrites. 
[165] į e., your forefathers. 

166] i.e., the original Torah of Moses and the Gospel of Jesus. 

167] Meaning, a believer is always tested through the loss of wealth as well as 
sickness, injuries, and the loss of ife. 

[168] The caller is Muhammad ( (2772). 

169] Râbito refers to watching wed borders of one’s homeland. It can also 

mean keeping up one’s prayers. 
[170] i e., Adam and Eve. 

171] The Quran is the only scripture that says marry only one. Unlike any 
previous faith, Islam puts a limit on the number of wives a man can have. 
Under certain circumstances, a Muslim man may marry up to four wives 
as long as he is able to provide for them and maintain justice among them 
—otherwise it is unlawful. With the exception of Jesus Christ and John 
the Baptist (neither of whom were married), almost all religious figures 
inghe@ible had more than one wife. According to the Bible, Solomon 
(-la.iz) had 7 PLwives and 300 concubines (1 Kings 11:3) and his 
fétltér, David (7( 5772), had many wives and concubines (2 Samuel 5:13). 

172] A bondwomén7fs a female slave that a man owned either through 
purchase or taking her captive in war—a common ancient practice in 
many parts of the world. Islam opened the door for ending slavery by 
making it an act of charity to free slaves. Many sins (such as breaking 
one’s oath, unintentional killing, and intercourse with one’s wife during 
the day of fasting in Ramadan) can be atoned by freeing a slave. 


According to Islamic teachings, no free person can be enslaved. Islam 
also improved the condition of slaves. It was unlawful to separate a 
mother from her child. Children born to a slave- Er were deemed free, 
and their mother would gain her freedom upon sh aleath of her master. 
With regards to slaves, Prophet Muhammad (. le) says, “Feed them 
from what you eat, clothe them from ot eae you wear, and glo not 
overwhelm them with work unless you assist them.” He (. 1) also 
says, “Whoever kills his slave will be killed and vehoeve (“AA Mures his 
slave will be injured.” In recent times, slavery has been outlawed in all 
countries—including the Muslim world. 


173] Inheritance entitlements of immediate family members (children, 


174] 


175] 


176] 
177] 


parents, full- and half-brothers and sisters, and spouses) are given in the 
following verses: 7, 11-13, 32-33, and 176. Shares are determined mainly 
according to the closeness of the heir to the deceased (i.e., close relatives 
get more than distant relatives), age (i.e., those who are young get more 
than those who are old), and—to a lesser degree—gender. 

For example, in the case of orphaned children whose grandfather then 
dies, leaving behind other children, some scholars rule that an obligatory 
bequest should be made to them despite not having a share in inheritance. 

According to Islamic law of inheritance, a female—whether she is a 
mother, a wife, a sister, a daughter, etc.—gets one of three shares, 
depending on her closeness to the deceased: 

1. Less than a male’s share. If she is a daughter, she will get half 
of the share of her brother, since he—unlike his sister—has to 
provide for the family and pay a dowry at the time of his 
marriage. 

2. More than a male’ share. For example, if a man leaves $24 
000 and six sons, two brothers, a wife, and a mother. The wife 
will get one-eighth ($3000), the mother one-sixth ($4000), each 
of the sons will receive about $2 833 and the two brothers will 
not get anything. 

3. An equal share. This is in the case of siblings from the 
mother’s side (mentioned in verse 12 of this sûrah). 

"Offspring” here means any number of children—male or female. 

And the father will take the rest of the estate. 


178] Although the existence of siblings reduces the mother’s share from one- 
third to one-sixth, siblings themselves do not receive a share of 
inheritance and the rest of the estate goes to the father. 

179] Debts as well as any other financial obligations (such as funeral 
expenses, unfulfilled vows, or unpaid dowry) have to be repaid before the 
fulfilment of bequests, then the estate can be distributed among the heirs. 
A person can bequest up to one-third of their estate for charities as well 
as individuals who are not entitled to a share in inheritance. 

180] You do not know who will benefit you by looking after you during your 
life or doing good deeds on your behalf after your death. 

181] Tf there are two or more brothers and sisters from the mother’s side, they 
share one-third equally—the female will receive the same share of the 
male. 

182] Harming the heirs includes giving away more than one-third of the estate 
as a bequest. 

183] The popular interpretation among Muslim scholars is that verses 15 and 
16 refer to male and female premarital/extramarital relations, though the 
punishment was later abrogated by 24:2. A few scholars maintain that 
these two verses refer to homosexuality. Their argument is that, unlike 
other verses in the Quran that talk about illegal relations between males 
and females, each of these two verses specifies a gender—females in the 
first and males in the second. 

184] A person’s repentance will be accepted as long as they repent any time 
before their death. But one should not procrastinate because they do not 
know when they will die. 

185] For example, a man would prevent a female relative (such as his sister or 
mother) from getting married so he can secure her estate for himself. 

186] lit., blatant misconduct. If someone’s wife has been found guilty of 
adultery, he has the right to ask for his dowry back. 

187] i.e., the promise to live with her in kindness or divorce her with dignity. 

188] Marriage to any of the listed women became null and void with the 
revelation of these verses. 

189] A man was not allowed to have a relationship with a bondwoman who 
he had taken captive in war unless he made sure she was not pregnant. 


This was verified by her having at least one monthly cycle. See footnote 
for 4:3. 

190] Do not be ashamed to marry a bondwoman since you are all part of the 
same human family and Allah knows you are doing so to avoid illegal 
relationships. 

191] A married slave-woman is forbidden from having a relationship with her 
master. 

[192] i e., fifty lashes. 
[193] i e., Paradise. 

194] This pledge was a common practice before Islam between friends and 
allies—taking oaths to inherit each other. This practice came to an end 
with the revelation of verse 8:75 of the Quran. Although friends and 
allies do not have a share in inheritance anymore, they still can get some 
of the estate through bequest. 

[195] i.e., their husbands’ honour and wealth. 

196] Djisciplining one’s wife gently is the final resort. The earliest 
commentators understood that this was to be light enough not to leave a 
mark, should be done with nothing bigger shdipa tooth stick, and should 
not be on the face. Prophet Muhammad (^ {4 lg) said to his companions 
“Do not beat the female servants of NAL He said that honourable 
husbands do not beat their wives, and he himself never hit a woman or a 
servant. If a woman feels her husband is ill-behaved, then she can get 
help from her guardian or seek divorce. 

197] Jit., the smallest particle ghips (Zarrah). 

198] Prophet Muhammad et ~[z) asked one of his companions, ’Abdullah 
ibn Mas’ fid, to recite someé“verses of the Quran for him because he loved 
to hear it from someone other than himself. ’Abdullah recited from the 
beginning of this sûrah until he reached verse 42. When he wad ld he 
may stop, Abdullah said he looked at the face of Prophet ( .{< zle) and 
saw tears rolling down his cheeks. os. . 

199] Tntoxicants were prohibited in the Quran in three stages: 2:219, 4:43, and 
finally 5:90-91. 

200] i e., after sexual intercourse or a wet dream. 

201] This ruling is called tayammum or ‘dry ablution.’ If someone cannot find 
water or is unable to use it because of illness or cold weather, then they 


are allowed to touch clean earth, sand, etc. with the palms of their hands 
once then blow in their hands and wipe over their face and hands. 

2021 See footnote for 2:104. 

203] See 7:163-165. 

204] A person will never be forgiven if they die as a disbeliever. But if they 
repent before their death and mend their ways, then their repentance will 
be accepted (see 25:68-70). 


205] i.e., the polytheists.;,7 z E 
i.e., the poly eists {a h 


[206] į e., Abraham (<(2-[;) or Muhammad (4 
(Ba 5z 


[207] See footnote fo 

208] This verse was revealed right after Mecca had peacefully surrendered to 
the Muslims. ’Ali ibn Abi Talib, the Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law, 
took the Ka’bah’s key by force from Othman ibn Talha, the non-Myyslign 
keeper of the Ka’bah. The verse was revealed to the Prophet ( (2.12) 
inside the Ka'balpawith the order to give the key back to its As tful 
owner. He (.({%. iz) ordered Ali to return the key to the keeper 
immediately one with an apology. Othman was also promised that his 
family would keep the key forever. The keeper was so touched by the 
Quranic sense of justice that he decided to accept Islam. 

[209] i.e., obeying Allah and His Messenger. 

210] Both good and evil are destined by Allah. The good comes as Allah’s 
reward for good deeds, whereas the bad comes as Allah’s punishment for 
evil deeds. In some cases, bad things happen to good people to test their 
faith, or as an atonement for their sins, or as part of a process of replacing 
something with what is better (e.g., a job or a spouse). 

2111 i.e., when they get the news of victory or a threat. 

212] The verse discusses a group of people who nominally became Muslims 
and secretly supported the enemies of Muslims. For those hypocrites to 
prove their loyalty, they were commanded to emigrate and join the ranks 
of the believers, or they would be considered enemies. 

213] If a Muslim commits a major sin (such as intentional killing or adultery) 
and dies without repenting, they will be punished in Hell according to the 
severity or magnitude of the sin, then eventually be taken out of Hell. No 
Muslim will stay in Hell forever. 


[214] i e., spoils of war. 
[215] This includes women, the elderly, the sick, etc. 

216] This verse refers to some of those who had accepted Islam secretly in 
Mecca but refused to emigrate to Medina along with the rest of the 
believers. Some of them were killed in the Battle of Badr when they were 
rallied by the Meccans to fight against the Muslims. The verse also 
applies to any Muslim who accepts abuse and refuses to move to another 
place where they can live with dignity and practice their faith freely. 

217] Generally, it is permissible for Muslims who are travelling a distance of 
85 km or more to shorten their prayers. A four-unit prayer is reduced to 
two. 

218] When the first group prays, the second group stands guard behind them, 
then the first group withdraws to the back when they finish their prayers 
and stand guard when the second group moves up to pray. 

219] Verses 105-112 were revealed in defence of Zaid ibn As-Samin, a 
Jewish man, who was falsely accused of theft. A shield was stolen by a 
Muslim named Tu’mah ibn Obairaq and entrusted to Zaid. Tu’mah’s 
family rushed to his defence and accused Aig of the crime. They also 
tried to influence Prophet Muhammad (.{< le) to make a decision in 
favour of Tu’mah and punish the Jew, buh verses were soon revealed 
declaring Zaid’s innocence. 

220] lit., deceive themselves. 

221] This applies to those who die in a state of disbelief in Allah. But those 
who repent before their death and mend their ways, their repentance will 
be accepted (see 25:68-70). 

222] The pagans of Arabia used to shape their idols as females and give them 
feminine names such as Al-Lat, Al-’ Uzza, and Manat. 

223] Slitting the ears of cattle dedicated to idols was a superstitious practice 
before Islam. 

[224] This refers to verses 2-11 of this sûrah. 

225] i.e., their inheritance and dowries. 

226] This implies that many husbands and wives are unwilling to give the 
other their rights. 


2271 Do not leave one hanging—not fully enjoying the rights of a married 

woman and not fully divorced. 
[228] This refers to 6:68. 

229] i.e., Allah does not like talking about people behind their backs—except 
when someone who has been wronged seeks counselling or assistance 
from authorities. 

230] By their claim that they believe in Allah but still reject some of His 
messengers. 

231] j.e., they demanded the Quran to be revealed all at once in writing 
similar to the Tablets of Moses. This demand is refuted in 25:32. 

232] Their hearts are unreceptive because they claim they have enough 
knowledge already. 

233] j.e., they slandered Mary by claiming that she conceived Jesus through 
an illegal relationship. 

234] The popular belief among Muslims is that a conspiracy was made to kill 

Jesus, Allah made the main culprit who betrayed Jesus look exactly like 

Jesus, then he was crucified in Jesus’ place. Jesus was raised safe and 

soundgo the heavens. Muslims also believe in the second coming of Jesus 

( «Le. (3). 

choars disagree whether Jews and Christians will come to realize that 

Jesus is a prophet of Allah at the time of their death or before the death of 

Jesus after his second coming. 

236] The Jews are warned against denying Jesus as the Messiah, while 
Christians are warned against calling Jesus Allah. 

237] i.e., Jesus was created by Allah’s Word “Be!” and he was, and life was 
breathed into Jesus by the holy spirit (the angel Gabriel) at the command 
of Allah. 

238] This ruling also applies to brothers and sisters from the father’s side—if 
they are the only heirs. 

239] This verse is placed at the end of the sûrah and not with similar verses at 
the beginning to connect the end of this sûrah with the next one or, 
according to Al-Fakhr Ar-Rdzi, either to tie the end of the sûrah with its 
beginning for emphasis, as found in 20:2 and 124 as well as 23:1 and 


235] 


117, or to emphasize Allah’s knowledge, just like the first verse 
emphasizes His power. 

240] To make a decision in pre-Islamic Arabia, a person would draw one of 
three straws: one saying “Do it,” the other “Do not do it,” and the third 
was left blank, whereas in Islam there is a special prayer (called 
istikharah) for guidance when making a decision. 

241] “The food of the People of the Book” here means the meat of the 
animals slaughtered by the Jews and Christians. 

242] For example, following sexual intercourse or a wet dream. 

243] This ruling is called tayammum or ‘dry ablution.’ See footnote for 4:43. 

244] He rescued you from Egypt where the Pharaoh treated you like slaves 
and blessed you with freedom so you can manage your own affairs. 

245] i.e., the miracles of splitting the sea, water coming out of the rock, 
manna and quails, and clouds shading them. 

[246] Habil and Qabil, respectively. 

247] Tn Islam, regret for doing something wrong is essential for repentance. 
But in the case of Cain, his regret was not for killing his brother, but for 
failing to bury his corpse to hide the evidence of his crime. Therefore, his 
regret was not intended as a step towards repentance. 

248] Although this is addressed to the Children of Israel, it is applicable to 
everyone at all times. 

249] This ruling (called hirdbah) applies to crimes committed by armed 
individuals or groups against civilians—Muslim or non-Muslim. 
Different punishments apply depending on the severity of the crime: 

1. In the case of murder or rape, offenders are to be executed. 

2. In the case of armed robbery, offenders’ right hands and left 
feet are to be cut off. 

3. In the case of terrorizing innocent people, offenders are to be 
jailed in exile. 

4. Penalties for lesser offences are left for the judge to decide. 

250] Tn Islam, strict conditions must be met for punishments to be carried out. 
For example, for someone to be punished for theft, the thief must be a 
sane adult who knows that theft is forbidden, the crime has to be proven 
either by confession or the testimony of two reliable eyewitnesses, the 
stolen item has to be of value and taken secretly from a safe place, and 


the owner has to claim it. Otherwise, the punishment is not applied. 
Islamic punishments apply neither in non-Muslim countries nor in 
Muslim countries where Shari’ah is not fully applied. Moreover, the 
punishment is only applicable in a society where the needs of the poor are 
adequately met (i.e., they receive alms-tax, charity, or welfare) and where 
theft is more out of desire than necessity. It is worth mentioning that 
"Umar ibn Al-Khattab, Islam’s 2"¢ Caliph, suspended this punishment 
for one year due to widespread famine. 
[251] i.e., bribes and interest. 

252] Wali meays, guardian, caretaker, protector, provider, ally, etc. The 
Prophet (-{2-|<) for example says, “A woman should not get married 
without wea r”—that is a guardian such as her father to represent her in 
the marriage and make sure she receives her full rights. The verse forbids 
Muslims from allying with the Jews and Christians (or anyone else) 
conspiring to persecute Muslims. On the other hand, as long as non- 
Muslims are not at war with Muslims or persecuting them, the Quran 
(60:8) commands Muslims to be kind and gracious to them. 

253] Literally or metaphorically. See footnote for 2:65. 

[254] lit., Allah’s Hand is tied up "with greed’. 
[255] See footnote for 2:62. 

256] ie., they were in need of food for nourishment. According to some 
scholars, this implies that Jesus and his mother had to relieve themselves 
after the food had been digested. Almighty Allah is far above depending 
on food or having to go to the restroom. 

257] i.e., the pagans. 

258] See footnote for 5:3. | le 

2591 Some Muslims would ask the Prophet at "i) unnecessary and 
sometimes meaningless questions. For anp their fathers were, 
where their lost animals were, what they had in their pockets, etc. Some 
would even demand new rulings that would probably make things 
difficult for some Muslims or even themselves. 

260] This implies that either these minor details have been overlooked by 
Allah out of His mercy or that Allah has forgiven them for these 
unnecessary questions. 


261] These camels were allowed by pagan Arabs to pasture freely and were 
not to be used for labour or transportation after fathering or giving birth 
to a certain number of male or female camels. 

[262] i e., the pagans. 

263] After fulfilling their obligation of delivering the truth, enjoining what is 
good, and forbidding what is evil. 

[264] Tf no Muslim witnesses can be found. 
[265] i e., the angel Gabriel. 
[266] lit., Muslims. 

267] This refers to the ascension of Jesus Christ. See footnote for 3:54. 

268] i e., as Your creation, they cannot escape the punishment. 

269] “Light” is always used in the Quran in the singular (nûr), whereas 
“darkness” is used in the plural (Zulumât). Nûr is usually used in a 
metaphorical sense to refer to true guidance, whereas Zulumât refers to 
different forms of misguidance. 

270] i.e., created your father, Adam, from clay. Some scholars suggest that if 
we examine all the minerals found in the earth (potassium, nitrogen, and 
carbon), we find that these are the same minerals that make up our body. 
Furthermore when we die, our bodies are absorbed back into the ground. 
And when we are resurrected, we will be resurrected from the ground 
(see 20:55). 

271. Similar to the Tablets of Moses. 

272] i.e., they would have been destroyed immediately upon denying the 
angel. 

273] Allah has created living beings (like animals, birds, and fish) just like He 
created human beings. He provides for all and is merciful to all. They all 
belong to communities and have their own systems of living. 

2741 The Record refers to the Preserved Tablet (Al-Lawh Al-Mahfaz) in 
which Allah has written the destiny of His entire creation. De 

2751 Some of the influential leaders of Mecca asked the Prophet (s147) to 
send poor Muslims away if he ever wanted these elites to sit a diten to 
his /imgssage. These verses were revealed commanding the Prophet 
( -{<- |<) to keep the company of the poor and not alienate them. 

[276 14 seeking His Face. 


277] The five keys of the unseen are mentioned in 31:34. 

278] See footnote for 6:38. 

2791 Jit., their faith (which they are supposed to follow). 

280] Allah grants authority to some of His servants in this world, but none 
will have authority on Judgment Day except Him. See 3:26. 

281] On the Day of Judgment, the Trumpet will be blown by an angel— 
causing all to die. When it is blown a second time, everyone will be 
raised from the dead for judgment (see 39:68). 

282] i.e., associating false gods in worship wait we Almighty. 

[283] ; : po = 

222] i.e., the companions of the Prophet ( . {< zle): 

[284] Some Jews. w : 

285] “The Mother of Cities” is an honorary title given to the city of Mecca 
because of its great religious significance as the home of Allah’s first 
house of worship ever built on earth, and perhaps because of its central 
location as well; | [2 

[286] ie., Adam (S127). 

287] Jinn are anotiercreation of Allah, made of “smokeless fire,” and inhabit 
a realm parallel to our own. Like us, they have free will and can choose 
guidance or disobedience. 

[288] i e., “Jesus” in Christian belief. 
[289] i e., “the angels” in pre-Islamic Arab tradition. 

290] No one is able to see Allah in this world, but theres extensive evidence 
in the Quran and the teachings of the Prophet ( . {< le) that the believers 
will be able to see their Lord on the Day of radar s tbe 

291] Allegations have always been made that the Prophet Ce "i2) Copied the 
Quran from the Bible, mostly because of similar fiatfatives in both 
Scriptures (such as the stories of Adam, Joseph, Moses, and others). 
Historically, tha Bible was not translated into Arabic until centuries after 
the Prophet ( - {4 rg): Even if an Arabic translation of the Bible existed at 
his time, he (.{Z* |<) could not have copied it because he could not read 
or write. = AE Islamic point of view, similarities stem from the fact 
that both scriptures came originally from the same source—divine 
revelation. For more details, see the Introduction. 


292] Because Muslims are allowed to eat the meat of animals slaughtered 
properly and not carrion, the pagans of Mecca used to argue, “Why are 
you only allowed to eat what you yourselves kill but not what Allah 
causes to die?” 

2931 The Quran often compares disbelief to death and blindness whereas 
belief is compared to life and the ability to see. 

[294] Ts]am literally means ‘submission to the Will of Allah.’ 

295] For example, the jinn helped humans with magic, while the jinn had a 
feeling of importance when they had a human following. 

296] i.e., disobedient Muslims. They will be punished according to the 
severity of their sins, but eventually no Muslim will stay in Hell forever. 

2971 The pagans used to assign Allah a share of their property (as a charity to 
the poor) and another to their idols (as a fee to idol keepers). However, 
Allah’s share always ended up in the pockets of the keepers, whereas the 
share of false gods was never donated to the poor. 

298] Some pagan Arabs used to kill their own children (especially females) 
for fear of poverty. Others would vow to sacrifice a son if blessed with a 
certain number of sons. 

[299] Or trellised and untrellised. 

300] These four pairs were the main domesticated cattle in Arabia at the time 
of revelation. 

301] Strong cattle like camels and oxen can be used for labour, whereas 
smaller ones like goats and sheep are not suitable for labour but are good 
for their meat, milk, hide, etc. 

302] For example, in retaliation for intentional killing through legal channels. 

[3031 i.e., when you testify or judge. 
[304] i e., the Quran. 

305] This refers to disobedient believers who neither did any good nor 
repented before the time of their death or the arrival of the Day of 
ae This is supported DY authentic narrations from the Prophet 
(- 26) J A 

[306r | your father, Adam (^ pa =). 


[307] See footnote for 2:34. 


308] Satan asked to be allowed to live until humans are resurrected in order to 
escape death at the end of time. He was told he was going to live only 
until the time appointed by Allah Almighty. 

309] There will be enmity between humans and Satan. 

310] Tt was customary for the pagans of Mecca to circle the Ka’bah while 
naked. So verses 26-31 of this stirah were revealed commanding the 
believers to cover themselves properly when praying to their Lord. 

31] The pleasures of this worldly life are shared by believers and 
disbelievers, whereas the pleasures of the Hereafter will be enjoyed 
exclusively by the believers. 

312] i.e., they will receive all provisions and bounties destined for them by 
their Lord. 

313] i.e., the bitterness they had in their hearts towards other believers who 
wronged them in the worldly life. 

3141. This is a group of people whose good deeds equal their bad deeds, so 
they will be held on the heights separating Paradise and Hellfire until 
their judgment is settled. 

315] Although the word “rijdl” generally means “men,” some Quran 
commentators believe that the word “rijal” here can also mean “people,” 
but they are called men since men make up the majority in the group. In 
some Arabic dialects, “rijal” is the plural of “rajul” (man) and “rajulah” 
(woman). 

316] The faces of the residents of Paradise will be bright, whereas those of the 
residents of Hell will be gloomy. 

317] Jit., their faith (which they are supposed to follow). 

318] The word day is not always used in the Quran to mean a 24-hour period. 
According to 22:47, a heavenly Day is 1000 years of our time. The Day 
of Judgment will be 50 000 years of our time (see 70:4). Hence, the six 
Days of creation refer to six eons of time, known only by Allah. 

319] They argued that life has its ups and downs and, therefore, they did not 
perceive adversity as a punishment or prosperity as a test—arguing that 
the same thing happened to their ancestors. 

[320] lit., as Muslims. 
[321] As we did before the birth of Moses. 


[322] In psychology, this is called self-serving bias and scapegoating. 
[323] i e., their drowning in the sea. 

324] Allah reminds Moses that even though his request to see Allah was 
denied, he has already been favoured by Allah over the people of his time 
through prophethood and direct communication with the Almighty. 

325] To follow the commandments that generate more rewards than others, to 
put grace before justice, etc. 

326] This could either mean the ruins of destroyed nations or the Hellfire 
which is the home of the wicked. 

327] For asking Moses to make Allah visible to them. 

328] Some Muslim scholars cite Deuteronomy 18:15-18 and 33:2, Isaiah 42, 
and John 14:16 as examples of the description of Prophet Muhammad in 
the Bible. However, Bible scholars jntgpret these verses differently. The 
name of Prophet Muhammad (.{2772) appears several times in the 
Gospel of Barnabas, which i imed apocryphal by Christian 
authorities. 

329] Manna (heavenly bread) and quails (chicken-like birds) sustained the 
children of Israel in the wilderness after they left Egypt. 

330] The people of Aylah, an ancient town by the Red Sea, were forbidden to 
catch fish on the Sabbath. However, on Saturdays fish were everywhere, 
whereas on weekdays no fish were seen. To get around the prohibition, 
some decided to lay their nets on Fridays and collect the fish caught in 
their nets on Sundays. Those opposed to this practice were divided into 
two groups: one group tried to convince the offenders to honour the 
Sabbath, but soon gave up when their advice was not taken seriously. The 
second group was persistent in giving advice to the Sabbath-breakers. 
Eventually, the Sabbath-breakers were punished whereas the other two 
groups were saved. 

[331] Literally or metaphorically. See footnote for 2:65. 

332] The mountain was raised over their heads when Moses came to them 
with the teachings of the Torah and was met with defiance. So the 
mountain was raised as a miracle and a display of Allah’s infinite power 
over them. 

333] Bal’am ibn Ba’ûrâ' was a scholar who lived at the time of Moses but 
later deviated from the truth. 


334] Regardless of whether they are warned or not, still they will not believe. 

335] Those who twist Allah’s Names then use them to call false gods. For 
example, Alldt, a name of one of the idols was derived from Allah (the 
One God), Al-’Uzza was derived from Al-’Aziz (the Almighty), and 

Po was derived eee (the Bestower). 
i.e., Muhammad (.(277;). 
[337] Jit., their brothers. ( 7 

338] Following the victory of the Muslims over the Meccan army at Badr, 
some Muslims disagreed on the way the spoils of war should be 
distributed, so these verses were revealed. 5 | tbe 

339] After many years of persecution in Mecca, the Prophet (157) and 
many of his early followers decided to emigrate secretly to veia about 
250 miles to the north, leaving behind their homes and valuables, which 
were soon taken ovej] ‘by the pagans of Mecca. To avenge this financial 
loss, the Prophet (.{< le) decided to capture an unarmed Meccan trade 
caravan headed by(At Sufyân, a Meccan chief. Eventually, the caravan 
escaped, but the Meccans mobilized an army of over 1000 well-armed 
soldiers, more than three times the size of the Muslim force. Many 
Muslims had hoped to capture the caravan without having to meet the 
Meccan army in battle. Although the Muslims were vastly outnumbered 
and lightly-armed, they still won this decisive battle. 

340] Five thousand angels in total, as mentioned in 3:125. 

341] This happened the night before the pétgle. 

342] Before the battle, the Prophet (414 le) threw a handful of sand at the 
disbelievers and prayed for their ia 

[343] This refers metaphorically to the disbelievers who fail to see and hear 
the truth. 
[344] i.e., Mecca. 

345] The battle was not planned since the Muslim force was after the caravan. 
Had the two armies made plans to meet in battle at that time and place, 
they both probably would have missed each other. 

[346] Who survived the Battle of Badr. 
[347] i.e., ransom. 
[348] The decree that ransoming captives will be allowed. 


3491 This verse ended a previous ruling that allowed inheritance between 
Muslims from Mecca (Al-Muhdjirtin, the Emigrants) and Muslims from 
Medina (Al-Ansar, the Helpers). Now, only relatives can inherit from one 
another, whereas non-heirs can receive a share through bequest, up to one 
third of the estate. See 4:7, 11-13, 32-33, and 176. 

350! This is the only sûrah in the Quran that does not begin with: “In the 
Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.” The reason is 
that this sûrah is considered to be a continuation of the previous one, and 
that it begins with an open termination of treaties not fully respected by 
the polytheists. Since this constitutes a declaration of war, it would not be 
fitting to open with the mention of Allah’s compassion and mercy. 

351] The 10" of Zul-Hijjah, a significant day in the greater pilgrimage (hajj). 
The lesser pilgrimage is known as ’umrah. 

352] i.e., inside or outside the sanctuary of the Sacred House in Mecca. 

353] This is kupig as the Treaty of Hudaibiyah, which was signed by the 
Prophet ( {4 zle) and the pagans of Mecca in 6 A.H./628 C.E., diffusing 
the E A Muslims and the Meccans and affirming a 10-year 
peace truce. The treaty was violated by the Meccans in 8 A.H/630 C.E. 

354] After the Muslims’ victory in Mecca in 8 4630 C.E., almost all Arab 
tribes pledged allegiance to the Prophet ( .{27 |<) except some tribes such 
as Hawazin pps Thaqif. Both tribes deci eb tack the Muslims, so the 
Prophet ( (4.12) led an army of 12 000 soldiers to attack the two tribes. 
Since thaf W&s the largest Muslim army ever mobilized, some Muslims 
expressed their conviction that such an army could not be defeated. 
However, on the way to battle, the Muslim amie was ambushed and most 
soldiers fled, except for the Prophet (.(27{<) and a few loyalists. 
Eventually, the Muslims were eee won a decisive battle. 

[355] Jit., tranquility. 
[356] į e., angels. 

357] i.e., Allah will accept those who embrace Islam. Almost aly if Arabia 
became Muslim before the death of Prophet Muhammad (.[< zle) in 11 
A.H./632 C.E. ae 

358] į e., impure spiritually because of idolatry, not physically. 

359] The 9" year of the Prophet’s migration from Mecca to Medina. 


3601 To fully understand this verse we need to bear in mind that Quranic 
verses are of two types. General verses talk about belief in Allah, good 
manners, and acts of worship. Specific verses, such as this verse, were 
revealed in regards to particular situations. This stirah came at a time 
when the pagans of Arabia (and theiy Bies) repeatedly violated treaties 
they had signed with the Prophet ( (%12). Muslims had to fight for the 
survival of their newly establish! state in Medina. So this verse 
discusses dealing with those who violated their agreements and attacked 
the Muslims. Offenders were fought, unless they stopped their 
aggression. If they chose not to accept Islam, they were obligated to pay 
Jizya-tax. 

361] Taxation systems have existed since ancient times. There are several 
references in the Old Testament (e.g., Ezra 4:20). In the New Testament, 
Jesus allows paying taxes to Caesar (Luke 20:25). Under Islamic rule, all 
individuals had financial obligations—Muslims paid zakâh (2.5% of their 
savings) and non-Muslims (Zimmis) were required to pay jizyah (tax for 
protection from foreign enemies). The jizyah was an average of one dinar 
(4.25 g of gold) annually. Women, children, the elderly, the clergy, the 
poor, and those who were unable to work were exempt. Those who opted 
to join the army were also exempt. Poor Zimmis were supported 
financially by the state. Muslim rulers refunded the jizyah if they failed to 


w 


protect their non-Muslim subjects. sh 

362] When ’Adi ibn Hatim, a companion of the Prophet (4157C), heard this 
verse, he said, “But the Jews ägs Christians do not wed ip their rabbis 
and monks!” The Prophet ( .{< le) replied, “Do the rabbis and monks not 
forbid the permissible nd (Ca the forbiddem[ and they obey them?” 

’ Adi answered, “Yes, they do.” The Prophet ( .{%_ 12) concluded, “This is 
how they worship them.” Collected by AL Tina 

[363] i e., religion of truth. 

3641 i.e., the Preserved Tablet in which everything is written. 

365] The sacred months are the 11", 12, 1%, and 7" of the Islamic calendar. 
Since the polytheists knew that it was forbidden to fight in the sacred 
months, they used to transfer the sanctity to other months, say for 
example, the 3", 4", 8, and 10" as long as they maintained the sanctity 
of any four months throughout the year. 


366] The fast pace of the spread of Islam in Arabia in the 7 century was 
intimidating to the world’s pko superpowers of that time: the Romans and 
Persians. The Prophet (.{27 |<) received the news that a Roman army 
was being mobilized to IAuren an attack on the newly established Muslim 
state in Medina, so he announced that he was going to march to Tabik, 
located over 700 miles to the north, to meet the Romans in the summer of 
9 A.H./631 C.E. It was a time of hardship because of the scorching heat, 
the long distance {and the financial situation of the Muslims. Although 
the Prophet (.{< JG) was able to mobilize over 30 000 Muslims for 
battle, many re did not join the army with or without valid excuses. 
Eventually, the Roman forces were discouraged from fighting and fled to 
Damascus and other cities under Roman rule. Therefore, the Prophet 
(.{2-(<) returned to Medina with a feeling of triumph. With a new power 
ra emerging in Arabia, mapy ribes started to switch their alliances 
from Caesar to the Prophet ( . {4 zle): 

367] Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, slt “first Caliph and a pypipgnent figure in 
Islamic history. He accompanied the Prophet (.{< 16) during his 
emigration from Mecca to Medina after years of A at the hands 
of the Meccan pagans. 

368] For example, °’ Abd Jjähgibn Ubai ibn Salûl, a chief hypocrite, marched 
with the Prophet ( (27) for the Battle of Uhud in the outskirts of 
Medina, then decidéd*ffot to join the fight and returned to Medina with 
his followers who made up around one third of the Muslim army. 

368] Angther hypocrite by the name of Jadd ibn Qais came to the Prophet 
(-{<-/<) asking to be exempt from joining the army because he had a 
in mess for women and he was afraid that he would be tempted by 
Roman women. 

370] i.e., those who will repent. 

371] The overturned cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. s the 

372] i.e., some of them tried to assassinate the Prophet ‘ee zle) on the way 
back from Tabûk. #5 ” 

373]. Not only did the hypocrites withhold their wealth, but they were also 
critical of those who donated. If a rich believer gave generously, the 
hypocrites would say, “He is showing off,” and if a poor believer gave 
what they could afford, they would say, “This is not good enough.” 


374] i.e., the early Muslims who emigrated from Mecca to Medina, known as 
Al-Muhdjiriin. 

375] i.e., those from Medina, known as Al-Ansar, who accepted Islam and 
sheltered Muslim emigrants from Mecca. 

376] Through disgrace in this world and bad ending of their lives. 

3771 They have mixed their adherenges to Islam with their disobedience to 
march forth with the Prophet ( .(27 |<) to Tabtik. 

378] This verse refers to Ka’b Dei P Murarah ibn Rabi’, and Hilâl ibn 
Umaiyah, the three companions who remained in Medina with no excuse, 
but were honest about what they did. They were boycotted by Muslims 
for about fifty days until verses 118-119 of this sûîrah were revealed 
declaring the acceptance of their repentance. 

379]. Abu ’Amer Ar-Rahib was a monk who fought against Muslims at the 
Battle of Badr. He ordered a group of twelve hypocrites to build a 
mosque near the Mosque of Rubs’, the first mosque built by Muslims and 
also where the Prophet (.{27{<) and his companions would pray. The 
new mosque, oman a erred to as Masjid Ad-Dirdr (Mosque of 
Harm), was intended to attract other hypocrites and reduce the number of 
Muslims who prayed at Quba’. The hypocrites who built the mosque also 
anticipated, tig arrival of Abu ’Amer with Roman forces to expel the 


Prophet ( . ae) and Muslinggut of Medina. Upon a request from these 
ieee! Prophet (.{2- |<) had planned to visit the new mosque 
once he returned from AE yp eerse 107-110 of this sûrah were 
revealed, warning the Prophet ( .{< “ig Lasainst that mosque. According 
to some narrations, the Prophet rl le) ordered this mosque to be 
burned down. fas “ 
[380] See footnote for 7:46. 
381] Abraham promised to pray for his father’s forgiveness in 19:47 and 60:4, 
but when his lathariged as a disbeliever he discontinued praying for him. 
382] The Prophet (<4 le) is forgiven for exempting all those who came to 
him with erete ardless of their honesty, or for seeking forgiveness 
for the polytheists. 
[383]. See footnote for verse 106 of this sûrah. 
3841. This verse talks exclusively about the disbelievers at war with Muslims. 
See 2:190-193 and 60:8-9. 


[385] ie., hypocrites. 
[386] Their hypocrisy is exposed over and over again. 
[387] See footnote for 7:54. 
388] When they pray against themselves or their children, or when they 
demand to be destroyed. 
[389] je. they split into believers and disbelievers. 
[390] That He will delay their judgment until the Hereafter. 
391] The pagans of Mecca were not satisfied with the literary miracle of the 
Quran, so they demanded a tangible miracle such as the staff of Moses. 
[392] Paradise. 
[393] Seeing Almighty, wide in the Hereafter. 


[394] The Prophet (4 
[395] This refers eae cally to the pagans who fail to see and hear the 
truth. 
[396] į e., only for a short period of time. 
397] Either in this life to deliver the message or on the Day of Judgment to 
testify for or against them. 
[398] This refers to 6:138-139. 
399] By delaying their punishment and allowing them time to repent. 
400] See footnote for 6:38. 
[401] The Christians, pagans, etc. 
402] Jesus in Christianity, the angels in pagan Arab mythology, etc. 
403] Moses prayed while Aaron said, “Amen.” So it is as if both of them 
prayed. 
[4041 Jit., sign. 
405] In Egypt, Jerusalem, and other places. 
406] They did not split into believers and disbelievers until they received the 
knowledge given to their prophets. | like 
407] When these verses were revealed, the Prophet (4 =I) responded, “I am 
not in doubt and I will not ask ‘anyone’.” pa 
408] Initially, the people of Jonah rejected his message. When he was told 
they would be punished after three days for their defiance, he left his city 
without Allah’s permission before its destruction. Jonah’s people became 
convinced that they were going to be destroyed when he left them and 


they saw signs of the imminent torment, so they felt remorseful and cried 
out for forgiveness before the coming of the punishment. Therefore, 
Allah accepted their repentance and the torment was retracted. 

409] i e., until the end of their term. 

410] The hypocrites or the disbelievers. 

411] See footnote for 10:61. 

412] See footnote for on fits 

413] The Prophet (4 

414] i.e., the teed a prophets. 

415] Typically, the poor and the helpless are the first to believe in prophets, 
taking them as saviours, whereas the rich and powerful are hesitant to 
believe, perceiving the new faith as a threat to their influence. 

416] Mercy here regi BPnetnood 

417] Muhammad (4 

418] Noah was give one a that once the water gushes out of a particular 
oven then the Flood is about to begin. It can also be translated as: “The 
fountains of the earth gushed forth.” 

419] Jit., there is no moving creature that He does not hold by its forelock. 

4201 lit., my Lord is on the Straight Path. 

[421] Disobey Hiid was an act of disobedience to all messengers. 

422] They believed that Salih had the potential to be their future leader. 

423] The she-camel came out of a mountain as a sign for them. 

424] Ty ancient Middle Eastern culture, if a guest refused to eat the food 
provided by their host, it was a sign of ill-will. 

425] She laughed after her husband was assured that the guests intended no 
harm or when she heard the news of the imminent destruction of the 
sinful people of Lot. 

426] Since the angels came in the form of handsome men, Lot was worried 
for the dignity and safety of his guests among his people—not knowing 
that they were angels. 

427] Single women of his community. 

428] Lot’s wife disbelieved in his message. It is believed that she is the one 
who informed the people of Lot’s handsome guests. 

429] Geographically and chronologically. 


430] Sinful believers will eventually be removed from Hell after receiving 
their punishment. 

431] Except the time they spend on earth and in the grave, or except the time 
the sinful believers spend in Hell before being transferred to Paradise. 

432] That He will delay their judgment until the Hereafter. 

433] This verse talks about the five daily prayers. The prayers at the two ends 
of the day are the dawn prayer (Fajr) at one end and the afternoon 
prayers (Zuhr and ’Asr) at the other. Prayers in the early part of the night 
include the sunset (Maghrib) and late evening (’ Isha’) prayers. 

434] Quran literally means recitation. 

435] The address here is to the Arabs and, by extension, all of humanity. 

436] This dream came true at the end of the story (see 12:100). 

437] Unlike Joseph’s other brothers, Benjamin was Joseph’s full brother. They 
lost their mother at a young age, so their half-brothers thought that their 
father loved them more. 

438] They stained Joseph’s shirt with blood from a sheep, but forgot to tear 
his shirt. So Jacob became suspicious when he saw the intact shirt. 

439] i.e., patience without complaining. 

440] Other possible translations: 1. “... so little did they value him.” 2. “... 
they had no interest in him.” In any case, they wanted to sell him 
immediately before someone claimed him. According to some Quran 
commentators, it was Joseph’s brothers who sold him to the travellers 
after he was picked up from the well. The verse states that Joseph was 
sold for a few worthless coins. Ironically, in 12:88 Joseph’s brothers 
came to him after he became Egypt’s Chief Minister, begging for supplies 
and saying that the only money they could afford was a few worthless 
coins. This is when Joseph revealed his true identity to them. 


441] Potiphar, the Gpiet Minister of Egypt (Al-’Aziz). 


442] Joseph Ce iz) received warning against fornication either through 
divine inspite or a vision of his father. 

443] She was urged to seek forgiveness from her husband. 

4441 The women’s only objection was because the wife of the Chief Minister 


was in love with someone raised in her house like a son. 


445] Jit, ‘their cunning’ because the women themselves were probably 
interested in Joseph. 

446] The women were cutting fruit, and when Joseph came out they were so 
impressed by his beauty that they sliced through the fruit and into their 
hands without knowing. 

447] The women tried to convince him to obey the Chief Minister’s wife, so 
Joseph prayed to Allah to keep him away from them. 

448] To stop women from being charmed by Joseph’s beauty, or to put an end 
to the rumours, or to keep him away from the Minister’s wife. 

449] Meaning, “You call them gods while in fact they are not gods.” 

[450] The King of Egypt. 

451] Tn the Bible (the Book of Genesis), this ruler is referred to as a pharaoh, 
while in the Quran he is referred to as a king. Typically, Egypt was ruled 
by pharaohs, but there existed a brief period in Egyptian history in which 
Egypt was ruled by the Hyksos invaders (1700-1550 B.C.E.). Hyksos 
rulers were called kings, not pharaohs. Joseph entered Egypt during the 
reign of the Hyksos, who used to appoint some foreigners to prominent 
positions in Egypt. According to The Jewish Encyclopedia, “Those who 
regard the Joseph stories as historical generally hold that the Pharaoh by 
whom Joseph was made the practical ruler of Egypt was one of the 
Hyksos kings.” "Joseph," The Jewish Encyclopedia, Volume VII 
(London: Funk and Wagnalls Company, 1916), p. 252. 

4521 Joseph’s family was affected by famine, so they had to travel to Egypt to 
buy supplies. 

453] į e., Benjamin. When Joseph hosted his half-brothers, they told him the 
number of people in their household for future supplies. 

454] He told them that every three or four of them should enter through a 
different gate. His desire was to protect them from envy and harm. 

4551 The King’s cup was also used as the standard measure for grain. 

456] Joseph was falsely accused of theft when he was young. 

457] He meant: I did not steal anything, nor did my brother “Benjamin”. You 
are the real thieves; you stole me from my father and threw me into the 
well. 


458] We did not know when we gave you our solemn oath that our brother 
was going to steal. 

14891 i @., patigngg, without complaining. 

460] Jacob eat iz) cried for so long that he became very weak-sighted. 
Some schofars suggest that he lost his sight completely. This does not 
contradict Jacob’s beautiful patience because he did not complain to 
anyone, but iparessed his sorrow only to Allah. 

461] Jacob (<(27/2) delayed the prayer for his children to be forgiven until 
pre daw Mf is a blessed time for supplication. 

462] Joseph’s parents and his eleven brothers prostrated before him out of 
respect, not as an act of worship. This was permissible in their tradition, 
but in e prostrate only to Allah. 

463] Joseph (S(T) did not mention how Allah saved him from the well 
because née not want to embarrass his brothers after forgiving them. 

[464] lit., as a Muslim. 

465] This includes Joseph’s brothers, the travellers who picked him up from 
the well and sold him into slavery, and the Chief Minister’s wife and 
other women in the city. 

[466] Males and females, sweet and bitter, etc. 

[467] Like the staff of Moses. 

468] He knows whether the egg will be fertilized or not, whether the baby 
will be born before or after nine months, whether the pregnancy will end 
with delivery or miscarriage, and whether there will be one baby or more. 

[469] Hope of rain and fear of torment. 

470] lit., prostrate. Meaning, all beings submit to His Will. 

471] Blindness and darkness are commonly used as an analogy for disbelief, 
whereas the ability to see and light refer to true faith in Allah. 

[4721 lit., seeking their Lord’s Face. 

[473] i e., the Hellfire. 

474] The disbelievers demanded a tangible miracle such as the staff of Moses. 

[475] See 17:110 and 25:60. 

476] See footnote for 6:38. 

477] This can mean that the disbelievers bit their own hands in rage, or they 
covered their own mouths mockingly, or that they put their hands over 


their messengers’ mouths to silence them. 

478] Tt is out of Allah’s mercy that He does not hasten your punishment but 
delays your death until your destined time. 

479] On the Day of Judgment, when the wicked realize that they are doomed, 
they will blame Satan for their great loss and will plead to him to do 
whatever he can to rescue them from the Hellfire. Satan will then stand 
up and deliver the speech quoted in this verse. 

480] That there is only one God worthy of worship. 

481] In this context, “humankind” refers only to those who deny Allah’s 
favours. 

482] Arab traders used to pass by the homes of some destroyed nations on 
their journeys to Syria and Yemen (such as ’Ad and Thamid, 
respectively), stopping shortly for rest. 

[483] Jit., had been Muslims. 
[484] i e., the Quran. 

485] Some jinn used to eavesdrop on the angels in heaven so they could 
disclose this information to their byan associates. But this practice 
came to an end when the Prophet ( .{< zle) was sent with the message of 
Islam. See 72:8-10. os. ” 

486] Allah will remain eternally after all pass away. 

487] This does not contradict other verses that say Adam was created out of 
dust and those that say he was made out of mud. Adam was created in 
stages: first from dust, which was later turned into mud, then clay. This is 
similar to saying: I made a loaf of bread out of grain, or flour, or dough. 

[488] See footnote for 2:34. 

489] i.e., the bitterness they had in their hearts towards other believers who 
wronged them in the worldly life. 

490] As mentioned in 11:69-70, the angels came to Abraham in the form of 
men and when he offered them food, they did not eat. In ancient Middle 
Eastern culture, if a guest refused to eat the food provided by their host, it 
was a sign of ill-will. 

[491] Single women of his community. 

492] This is the only time in the Quran where Allah swears by the life of a 

human being. Elsewhere Allah swears by the sun, the moon, the stars, 


and other marvels of His creation. p sh 

433] Jit., messengers, because denying Salih (4 e) was equal to denying 

all of Allah’s messengers. pa 
[494] Sûrah 1 of the Quran. 
[495] i.e., lit., what is certain—death. 

496] The verse refers to the diverse creatures that have been created for the 
service of humanity. 

497] This verse refers to a tyrant king who ordered the building of a tower so 
he can reach the heavens and fight Allah and the angels. Eventually the 
tower collapsed, leaving the tyrant crushed. 

[4981 lit., prostrates. 
[499] The angels. 

500] Some pagan Arabs used to bury their infant daughters alive for fear of 
shame or poverty. This practice was condemned and abolished by Islam. 
See 6:151 and 81:8-9. 

31] They say that Allah has daughters (i.e., the angels), although they 
themselves do not like to have daughters. 

[502] Jit., pleasant for those who drink. 

303] Intoxicants were later prohibited in the Quran in three stages: 2:219, 
4:43, and finally 5:90-91. 

204] In other words, if the pagan slave-masters are not willing to be equal to 
their slaves, why would they make anyone equal to Allah—the Supreme 
Master and Creator of all things? 

505] Hafadah means grandchildren, but can also mean children-in-law. 

506] The two parables emphasize that Almighty Allah masterfully conducts 
the affairs of the heavens and the earth, whereas false gods are incapable 
of anything. If this is the case, these gods are not His equal and He is the 
only one worthy of worship. 

597] He guides those who are sincere in their quest for guidance. 

[508] See footnote for 2:106. 
[509] The angel Gabriel. PE 

510] Some Meccan pagans claimed that the Prophet at =e) received the 
Quran from a non-Arab slave owned by an Arab ao 


511] This refers to ’Amméar ibn Y4sser, an early revert to Islam, who was 
tortured to leave Islam. To save his life, "Ammar pretended to d pge 
Islam, but his heart was full of faith. When he told the Prophet ( (a. 12) 
about what happened, this verse was revealed, reassuring him eA 
faith was intact. 

[512] See footnote for 2:173. 
[513] What is mentioned in 6:146. 

514] i.e., honourable mention and a righteous family. 

515] This verse refers to the Jews who claimed that Abraham was Jewish. See 
3:65-68. 

516] Al-Isrâ' refers to the Prophet’s Night Journey from Mecca to Jerusalem 
about a year before his emigration (or Hijrah) from Mecca to Medina. 
This journey came as a comfort for the Prophet after several years of 
hardship and persecution, which included a 3-year siege by Meccan 
pagans, who drove the Muslims out of the city and forbade anyone from 
trading, marrying, or feeding them. This was followed by the “Year of 
Sadness,” which included the death ofi the Prophet’s uncle Abu Talib, the 
major defender of Muhammad (.[{277,) despite his disbelief in his 
message, as well as the death of foe hes beloved wife Khadijah. 
The Prophet was carried overnight by a noble steed (called Burdq) from 
Mecca to Jerusalem where he met some earlier prophets and led them in 
prayer. He was later carried to the heavens (this journey is called Al- 
Mi’rdj, or the Ascension) where he received direct orders from Allah to 
observe five daily prayers. The Ascension is referred to in 53:13-18. 

[517] i.e., Allah. 

218] Some people are quick to pray against themselves or others in times of 
anger and frustration. 

519] This refers to the deeds that one is destined to do of their own free will. 
Out of His infinite knowledge, Allah knows people’s choices even before 
they make them. In the Hereafter, He will raise them from the dead for 
judgment. 

520] For example, in retaliation for intentional killing through legal channels. 

521] Here the word wali, “heir,” actually means awliyd' or “heirs,” which 
includes the closest relatives, both men and women. 

522] By killing anyone other than the killer, or killing others with the killer. 


523] Some pagans had the belief that the angels are the daughters of Allah. 

324] They rejected you as a magician, a poet, a fabricator, and madman. 

525] When everyone is raised from the dead, they will all praise Allah, 
regardless of what they had believed in this life. 

526] The reason David is singled opt re is because some Jewish authorities 
at the time of the Prophet (.{27/<) claimed that no scripture had been 
revealed after Moses. So thig vétse refutes this claim by referring to the 
Psalms of David. 

527] i.e., Jesus, Ezra, and the angels. Idol worship is refuted in other passages 
such as 7:191-198 and 34:22. 

[528] Or they did wrong by it. 

529] During the Night Journey mentioned in 17:1. 

530] The tree of Zaqqtim which grows in the depths of Hell as mentionpdgn 
37:62-65. The pagans of Mecca used to make fun of the Prophet ( . {< zde) 
and say, “How can a tree grow in Hell?” as . 

[531] See footnote for 2:34. 

532] Other meanings include: with their record of deeds, or their prophet, or 
their scripture. p pi D 

533] The pagans of Mecca tried in vain to dissuade the Prophet at ") from 
preaching the message of Islam. In some instances ines ered to 
worship his Allah if he agreed to bow to their idols, and some even 
offered him riches and positions if he just stopped preaching in the city. 

534] This verse gives the times of the five daily prayers: the decline of the sun 
refers to the afternoon and late afternoon prayers, the darkness of night 
refers to sunset and late evening prayers, then ths dawn prayer. 

535] This refers to the time when the Prophet (~{2 zle) will make intercession 
(shafâ’ah) on the Day of Judgment. gue 

536] This verse was revealed when the Prophet (43 received the order to 
emigrate from Mecca to Medina. So here hẹ (44712) is praying to leave 
Mecca honourably and enter Medina honoura yo * can also apply to any 
worldly activity that a person starts and finishes. 

37] The nine signs of Moses are: the staff, the hand (both mentioned in 
20:17-22), famine, shortage of crops, floods, locusts, lice, frogs, and 
blood (all mentioned in 7:130-133). These signs came as proofs for 


Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Otherwise, Moses had some other signs such 
water gushing out of the rock after he hit it with his staff, and splitting the 
sea. 
538] This may also refer to the second warning in 17:7. 

[539] į e., the faithful among the scholars of the Torah and the Gospel. 

[540] i e., Jesus, Ezra, or the angels. 

[541] i e., another god equal to Him. 

[542] ie., the idols. ; De 


[543] Muhammad ( (2) 

344] i.e., Jesus in aA and the angels in the pagan Arab traditions. 

345] Ar-Raqîm is the plaque that was placed at the entrance of the cave with 
the names and story of the People of the Cave. This is the story of a 
group of Christian youths who hid inside a cave outside the city of 
Ephesus around 250 C.E., to escape persecution at the hands of pagans 
during the reign of the Roman emperor Decius. The Quran does not give 
an exact number of the youths, although many scholars believe there 
were seven in addition to a dog. The youths slept for 300 years, plus nine 
(300 solar years equal 309 lunar years). 

346] Jit., We cast a cover of “deep” sleep over their ears. 

547] The People of the Cave themselves disagreed on how long they had slept 
in the cave. See 18:19. 

348] While they slept in the open space of the cave, fresh air blew through the 
cave, but they were protected from the heat of the sun. 

5491 This is because, during their long sleep, their eyes were open, their hair 
grew long, and their bodies rolled over to the right and left to prevent 
bedsores. 

550] Their antique silver coins gave them away. People rushed to the cave to 
greet the youths, who finally passed away and were buried in the cave. 
The King decided to build a place of worship at the cave to 
commemorate their story. 

551] Some pagans suggested that a wall should be built to seal off the cave, 
whereas the believers decided to build a place of worship at the cave to 
honour those youths. 

52] Based on what has been revealed in the Quran. 


553] Three hundred years in the Gregorian calendar equal three hundred and 
nine years in the Islamic lunar calendar. 
[554] Jit., seeking His Face. 
255] The word “thamar” can mean fruits, gold and silver, etc. 
[556] Created your father, Adam, from dust. 

557] This refers to good deeds that will benefit the believer in the Hereafter 
such as prayers or praises of Allah such as saying: ‘Subhdna-Alldah’ 
(Glory be to Allah), ‘Alhamdulillah’ (Praise be to Allah), ‘Lâ ilâha illa- 
Allah’ (There is no god ‘worthy of worship’ except Allah), and ‘Allahu 
akbar’ (Allah is the Greatest). 

[558] See footnote for 2:34. 
[359] i.e., the peoples of Ad and Thamiid. 

560] Tt is reported in an authentic narration collected by Bukhari that a man 
approached Moses after he gave a talk and asked him, “Who is the most 
knowledgeable person on earth?” Moses responded, “That would be me!” 
So Allah revealed to Moses that he should not have said this and there 
was in fact someone who was more knowledgeable than him. Moses was 
commanded to travel to meet this man, named Al-Khadir, at the junction 
of the two seas (which could be the northern part of Sinai between the 
Red Sea and the Mediterranean Sea, or the Southern part of Sinai where 
the Red Sea splits into the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba). 

561] Another possible translation: “The “salted” fish must have made its way 
into the sea. How strange!” 

562] Moses was given a sign: when he and his assistant Joshua (or Yûsha’ ibn 
Nin) lost their food (a salted fish), this would be the place where they 
would find the man of knowledge. 

[563] This i tae 

ne ota is the roy Lye a 

22"! The Prophet ( .{< ae commented on the story, “I wish Moses had been 
more patient fed ‘can learn more from that wise man.” 

565]. This is the story of a righteous king who travelled far and wide. He is 
titled Zul-Qarnain (lit., the man of the two horns) because of his journeys 
to the far east and far west (or the two horns/points of sunrise and sunset). 
Some believe Zul-Qarnain was Alexander the Great, but this is not sound 


since Alexander the Great was a polytheist. Many scholars believe it was 
Abu Kuraib Al-Hamiri, a righteous king from Yemen. 

566] They either had no clothes or homes to protect them from the sun. 

367] Gog and Magog are two wild peoples who were sealed off by a barrier 
built by Zul-Qarnain to stop them from raiding their peaceful neighbours. 
There are many speculations as to their location, but none is supported by 
reliable sources. Their coming out is mentioned in 21:96-97 as one of the 
major signs of the final Hour. 

[568] Gog and Magog. 

5691 On the Day of Judgment, the Trumpet will be blown by an angel— 
causing all to die. When it is blown a second time, everyone will be 
raised from the dead to be assembled for the Judgment (see 39:68). 

370] ie., the Quran. 

[571] i.e., Jesus, Ezra, and the angels. 
[372] A]-Firdaws, the highest place in Paradise. 

573] This was the voice of baby Jesus. Some say it was Gabriel. 

374] Jit., fast "from speech". Linguistically, Sawm means to abstain from 
something, such as food, speaking, and playing. 

575] i.e., his twin in virtue. They meant that they did not expect her to do 
something like that because they held her in high esteem like Aaron, 
Moses’ brother (perhaps because she was his descendant). 

5761 On a daily basis Muslims invoke Allah’s blessings upon ophet 
Muhammad (^ (37) and his family and Prophet Abraham (^ {4 zle) and 
his family, in ofobligatonýand optional prayers. os. ” 


ay aw Pa i 
577] Prophet Enoch (Idris) (<{27/;) is said tp be in the fourth heaven. 
} 
2/2! Israel is another name forJacob ( . [< zle) 


379] The word ghai can either mean t e evil consequences or a valley in Hell 
where they will be punished. 

380] There is no day or night in Paradise, only light. The verse says that the 
residents of Paradise will either be receiving provisions around these 
worldly times or without failure. Words such as morning and evening are 
used to make it easier for the people to understand. 

981] This passage is a response to the Prophet’s request to be visited by 
Gabriel more often. 


382] This refers to the bridge (known as AS-Sirdf) which is extended over 
Hell. Both the believers and disbelievers will be made to cross that 
bridge. The believers will cross it safely, each at a different speed 
according to the strength of their faith, whereas the disbelievers and the 
hypocrites will plunge into the Fire. 

583] See footnote for 18:46. 

584] This statement was made by Al-’As ibn Wâ'il, a Meccan pagan who 
staunchly disbelieved in resurrection. 

585] No one will be allowed to intercede except those who firmly believe in 
Almighty Allah. 

586] The pagans who claimed that the angels are Allah’s daughters, the 
Christians who claim that Jesus is the son of Allah, etc. 

587] Moses and his family lost their way in the dark while they were 
travelling from Midian to Egypt. 

288] Moses could have just said, “A staff.” But he volunteered to talk about 
the uses of the staff, adding that there are many other uses he has not 
mentioned, with the hope that Allah would ask him about it more. The 
reason is that Moses wanted to prolong the conversation with Allah as 
much as he could. 

589] Moses, who was dark-skinned, was asked to put his hand under his 
armpit. When he took it out it was shining white, but not out of a skin 
condition pipes elanoma. 

590] Moses (^ =) put a brand of fire in his mouth, which hindered his 
speech Gee éBrew up. In this verse, he prays to Allah to help him speak 
clearly, and his prayer is answered. 

391] In other words, Allah made Moses a likeable person so Pharaoh and his 
wife would agree to keep him. 

592] Moses had refused all wet-nurses that were brought for him. 

593] See footnote for 17:101. 

594] By saying that Moses’ miracle is pure magic. 

595] i.e., your prophet to receive the Tablets for your guidance. 

596] Manna (heavenly bread) and quails (chicken-like birds) sustained the 
children of Israel in the wilderness after they left Egypt. 


597] Moses selected a delegation of seventy people from his community to go 
to Mount Tar where it was appointed for him to receive the Tablets. On 
the way, he rushed for the appointment with Allah, arriving before the 
delegation. 

598] The Samiri, or the man from Samaria, was a hypocrite who led the 
Children of Israel into idol-worship. 

[599] To reveal the Torah for their guidance. 

600] To worship Allah alone until Moses returned with the Tablets. 

601] The jewellery they borrowed from their Egyptian neighbours before they 
fled Egypt. 

602] Moses’ orders are mentioned in 7:142. 

603] This verse could also be translated as follows: “I had an insight which 
they did not have, then grasped some knowledge from the messenger 
"Moses’, but "later’ threw it away. This is what my lower-self tempted me 
to do.” According to many Quran commentators, while Moses and the 
Children of Israel were crossing the sea to escape abuse by Pharaoh and 
his people, the Sdmiri saw Gabriel on a horse leading the way, and every 
time the horse touched the ground, it turned green. So the Samiri took a 
handful of dust from the hoof-prints of the horse, and later tossed it at the 
calf so it started to make a lowing sound. 

604] Meaning, alienated in the dessert, away from the people. 

[605] Jit., destined time. 
[606] The Quran. 
507] See footnote for 18:99. 
608] This can also mean “blind.” 
[609] This can also mean “footsteps.” 
610] Allah fully knows what fate awaits them and what they did in the world. 
[611] Or“... they cate encompass His knowledge.” 

612] The Prophet se "iz) Was eager to recite the Quran ay tide it was being 
revealed to hint 8 iigh the angel Gabriel. So he (.{%_{2) was told to 
take his time to learn it by heart once the verses are properly delivered to 
him. 

[613] See footnote for 2:34. 
614] There is no sun or cold weather in Paradise, only light. See 76:13. 


615] Unlike the Bible (Genesis 3), the Quran does not blame Eve for Adam’s 

fall from the Garden. 
[616] The Reminder is another name for the Quran. 
[617] That He will delay their judgment until the Hereafter. 

618] This verse refers to the times of the five daily prayers. 

619] The pagans of Mecca were not satisfied with a literary miracle in the 
form of the Quran, so they asked for a tangible miracle (see 17:90-91) 
similar to the staff of Moses. 

620] This either refers to the Bibli¢glzstories confirmed by the Quran or the 
prophecies of Muhammad ( (37) in the Bible. Some Muslim scholars 
cite Deuteronomy (45 aH Beh a8. Isaiah 42, and Johing!4:16 as 

examples of the description of Prophet Muhammad (.(27/2) in the 
Bible. However, Bible scholars interpret these verses ditek y, 

[621] lit., extinguished like ashes. 
[622] That Allah has al Haptner and children. 

623] The Prophet it ~{z) is ordered to challenge the pagans to produce 
logical and serif proofs for the existence of other gods beside Allah. 
The verses then argue that if there is more than one god, the different 
gods would have fought among themselves for domination, and the 
whole universe would have been ruined. The Quran, the Torah, and the 
Gospel are all in agreement that there is only One God. 

624] Some pagans claimed that the angels are Allah’s daughters. 

[625] This probably refers to the event commonly known as the Big Bang. 

626] The signs of the heaven include the galaxies, planets, stars, etc., all of 
which have an orbit. Our planet orbits the sun, the sun orbits the Milky 
Way Galaxy, and the Milky Way Galaxy orbits the Virgo Supercluster, 
etc. 

627] This can also mean that they are in awe of their Lord as much in private 
as they are in public. al nee 

628] Tt is reported in a hadith collected by Bukhari that Abraham (<(2772) 
said, while being thrown into the fire, “Allah ‘alone’ is sufficient 4g an 
aid’ for us and “He' is the best Protector.” 

629] Abraham and his nephew, Lot, migrated from Babel, Iraq to Jerusalem. 

[630] j e., the believers in his family. 


631] A man’s flock of sheep strayed into another man’s vineyard, eating and 
destroying all his produce. When the two men came to David for 
judgment, he ruled that the shepherd must give his animals to the 
vineyard owner in compensation for the damage. On their way out, the 
two men met young Solomon and the shepherd complained to him. 
Solomon discussed the case with his father, and suggested that the sheep 
should be kept with the man who lost his produce so he may benefit from 
their milk and wool, while the shepherd worked on the farm to restore it 
to its original state. Eventually the famer would take back his farm in 
perfect condition, and the sheep would be returned to the shepherd. David 
was impressed by his son’s insight and approved his fair judgment 
immediately. 

[632] Jit., devils. 
[633] The jinn dived to bring him pearls. 

634] This refers to his loss of health, wealth, and children. 

635] Scholars are in disagreement as to whether Zul-Kifl was a prophet or 
just a righteous man. Those who maintain that he was a prophet identify 
him with various Biblical prophets such as Ezekiel, Isaiahy A Obadiah. 

636] Or “thinking We will let him get away with it.” Jonah (4147) had been 
met with denial for many years. When he sensed the c ming of Allah’s 
torment, he abandoned his city without Allah’s permission. Eventually, 
his people repented before the coming of the torment, and Allah accepted 
their repentance (see 10:98), whereas Jonah ended up in the belly of the 
whale (see 37:140-148). 

637] The darkness of the night, the sea, and the belly of the whale. 

638] Meaning, “You will be there for eternity after all pass away.” 

639] Gabriel breathed into the sleeves of Mary’s garment so she conceived 
Jesus. 

[940] See 18:93-99. 

641] i.e., the Final Hour. 

642] See footnote for 43:57-58. 

643] This refers to Psalm 37:29: “The righteous shall inherit the land.” See 
footnote for 39:47. 


[644] Meaning, “We seek Allah’s help against your claims that He has 
partners ‘in worship’.” 
[645] Your father, Adam. 

646] Nutfah refers to the union of male and female gametes (sperm and egg) 
which results in the zygote after fertilization. 

[647] ° Alaqah, meaning the embryo resembles a leech. 

648] Mfudghah, meaning it resembles a chewed morsel. 

649] Fully formed or defected, evolving into a healthy embryo or ending in 
miscarriage. 

[650] Jit., they tumble on their faces. 

651] Meaning, no matter whata the deniers do, Allah will never stop 

supporting His Prophet ( . {4 zle): 
[652] See footnote for 2:62. #5 ” 
[653] Magi (singular: magus): Zoroastrians; fire-worshippers. 

654] lit., prostrate. Meaning, all beings submit to His Will. 

655] Another possible translation: “... and they have been guided to the Path 
of the Praiseworthy ‘God’.” 

656]. This wasyyeypaled after the pagans of Mecca had refused to let the 
Prophet ( (%12) and his companions proceed to the Sacred Mosque to 
perform moon pilgrimage (‘umrah), although they came all the way 
from Medina. Eventually, an agreement was made, stipulating that the 
Muslims return to Medina and come back the following year for ’umrah. 

[657] The Sacred Mosque is in Mecca. 

658] Generally, intending to do wrong does not necessitate a punishment, 
unless the person acts upon it. But the Sacred Mosque is unique in that 
intending to sin in it is sufficient to bring punishment from Allah, unless 
the person repents. al the 

659] According to Ibn Kathir, Abraham (<(27/,) said to Allah, “But my voice 
cannot reach all peoples.” Allah resia, “You make the call, and We 
will deliver the invitation to all.” 

660] Spiritual benefits such as prayers, pilgrimage, and forgiveness of sins, as 
well as worldly benefits such as meeting Muslims from everywhere and 
trading. 

661] Shaving their hair, clipping nails, and taking a shower. 


[962] See 5:3. 
[663] Milking or riding them until the time for sacrifice. 

664] For over thirteen years, Muslims had not been allowed to fight back 
against the brutality of the Meccan pagans, leading to the emigration of 
the Prophet and many of his companions to Medina. As the hostilities 
continued, this verse was later revealed allowing Muslims to fight back in 
self-defence. 

665] The Day ‘of Judgment’ is described as ’aqim (lit., barren) because it will 
terminate all forms of life on earth and no new day will be born. 

666] Allah grants authority to some of His servants in this world, but none 
will have authority on Judgment Day except Him. See 3:26. 

[667] For your service. 


668] AIl prophets came with the same message: have faith in one God and do 
good. But each faith-community had their own law. 

669] The Muslim code of life is called Shari’ah, which means a “path.” For 
more information, see the Introduction. 

670] Another possible translation: “How weak are the seekers (i.e., the idols) 
and the sought (i.e., the fly)!” 

[671] ie., Muslims. 

672] Zakâh means purification and growth. Paying alms-tax and charity are 
forms of purifying one’s wealth. 

673] lit., private parts. 

[974] See footnote for 4:3. 
[675] AJ-F. nes highest place in Paradise. 
[676] Adam (4 
677] See footnpté for A 5. 
678] This ae when the spirit is breathed into the embryo. 
[679] So he may recover from his “madness” or die. 

680] Noah was given a signal that once the water gushes out of a particular 
oven then the Flood is about to begin. It can also be translated as: “The 
fountains of the earth gushed forth.” 

[681] Jit., signs. ! ihe 

6821 Some scholars believe this passage refers to Prophet Salih (% 

683] The nine signs are: the staff, the hand (both mentioned Se fe. 22), 
famine, shortage of crops, floods, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood (all 
mentioned in 7:130-133). 

684] Tt is reported in an authentic narration „sple ted by At-Tirmizi that 
’Aishah, the Prophet’s wife, asked him (3 es oar jf ibis verse refers to 
those who steal or drink ‘alcohol’. The Pr ) answered, “No, 
it refers to those who pray, fast, and donate, but a ke he that titbeir deeds 
are rejected because they are not good enough.” Then he (. Bisa recited 
the last part of the verse: “It is they who race to do sood REE, always 
taking the lead.” 

685] This refers to the believers’ good deeds mentioned in 23:57-62. 

686] Their desire that the universe has more than one God. See 21:22. 

687] This refers to famine which affected the pagans of Mecca. 


[688] The Meccan pagans. 

689] Their claims that there are many gods, and that the Prophet is a liar, a 
poet, etc. 

690] Meaning, once they are dead, they will never return to the world. 

691] On the Day of Judgment, the Trumpet will be blown by an angel— 
causing all to die. When it is blown a second time, everyone will be 
raised from the dead for judgment (see 39:68). 

692] Everyone will be busy with their own situation. 

693] Compared to the length and misery of their stay in the grave and Hell, 
their worldly life will seem very short to them. 

694] The address here is to legal authorities. Adultery has to be proven either 
by confession or the testimony of four reliable witnesses. 

695] Tt is reported in a hadîth collected by Ay Tismizi that Marthad ibn Abi 
Marthad, a companion of the Prophet ( (%12), asked if he could marry 
’Anâq, a pagan prostitute he befriend¢d*fft Mecca before he accepted 
Islam. So this verse was revealed. However, if someone committed a sin 
then later repented genuinely, they will be accepted by Allah and the rest 
of the believers. 

696] Th order to be spared the punishment for false accusation. 

697] This ruling is called li’ân in Islamic legal system. Once the husband and 
the wife swear each five times, as specified in 24:6-9, the marriage is 
terminated forever—which means that they can never be remarried. 

698] This is referring to an incident where the Prophet’s wife, ’Aishah, was 
accused of adultery. She was part of a caravan, and when she lost her 
necklace and went looking for it, the caravan moved on without her. She 
waited until a man named Safwan ibn Al-Mu’attal found her and 
escorted her to the caravan. When they returned, the hypocrites began 
accusing her of adultery. The rumour spread, and ’Aishah defended her 
innocence, saying “If I told you now I had not done this, you would not 
believe me. And if I told you that I had done it, you would believe me. I 
now say what Jacob had once said. He said (12:18): “I can only endure 
with’ beautiful patience! It is Allah’s help that I seek to bear your 
claims.’” Bj after she said this, these verses were revealed to the 
Prophet ( -{2-{<), proclaiming her innocence. 

599] Because now you can tell who is a true believer and who is a hypocrite. 


7001 This refers to "Abdullah ibn Ubai, the leader of the hypocrites in 
Medina. 
701] This verse was revealed when Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, ’Aishah’s father, 
swore to end his financial assistance to his poor cousin, Mistah ibn 
Athathah, for taking part in the rumours against ’Aishah. Once the verse 
was revealed, Abu Bakr resumed his assistance to Mistah. 
702] Immoral thoughts never cross the minds of these chaste women and, 
therefore, they never expect slander. 
2031 This passage declares the innocence of ’Aishah, the Prophet’s wife. 
[204] lit., non-residential buildings. 
[205] i.e., hair, body shape, and underclothes. 

706] i.e., the face, hands, outer clothes, rings, kohl, and henna. 
[207] i e., hair, arms, and legs. 

208] Meaning, if a slave wants to buy his or her own freedom. 

2091 Some slave-masters used to force their slave-women into prostitution 
before Islam. In Islam, wilful prostitution is a sin, as is forcing others into 
prostitution. Victims of this crime are not held accountable. 

710] Before ’Aishah, Mary and Prophet Joseph had each been falsely accused 
of fornication, but Almighty Allah declared their innocence. 

711] This is a metaphor for the light of guidance in the heart of the believer. 

712] Meaning, the olive tree is wholesome because it is located in a central 
place, so it is hit by sunrays all day-long, and, therefore, the oil is of a 
premium quality. 

[213] See footnote for 7:46. 

114] This is another scientific fact mentioned in the Quran: the existence of 

underwater waves, like layers. 
[215] Those at fault. 

716] This is used in a sarcastic way. It means, “Save your oaths! Everyone 

knows you are only bluffing. It is actions that matter, not words.” 
[217] The Prophet’s only duty is to deliver the pyessage. 

718] Their only duty is to obey the Prophet (4: ~[.) by submitting to Allah. 

718] There is no blame on any of the thr¢e +f*they do not march forth in 
Allah’s cause. Moreover, some Muslims would give the keys of their 
homes to one of those who could not march forth (namely the blind, the 


disabled, or the sick) or their own relatives and ask them to enter their 
houses and eat at will but these people were shy to do that. 

720] i.e., the home of your spouse or children. 

721] If someone is in the house, greet them by saying, ‘As-salamu ’alaikum’ 
(peace be upon you).” But if there is no one there, you greet yourselves 
by saying, ‘Asaldmu ’alaina wa ’ala ’ibdd-illahi as-sdalihin’ (peace be 
upon us and all righteous servants of Allah).” 

722] There is also a different interpretation: “Do not call the Messenger ‘by 
his name’ as you call one another.” In other words, Do not say, ‘O 
Muhammad.’ Rather, say, ‘O Prophet.’ p lhe 

723] Some hypocrites used to sneak out while the Prophet (4 =) was 
talking. pea 

724) Al-Furqân, which is one of names of the Quran, means "the standard to 
distinguish between right ieee 

[225] Prophet Muhammad C 
[726] For both humang, tie 
[227] The Prophet (4 LULZ 

728] Some Arab See) that the Prophet 4s =) had been taught 
the Bible by some non-Arab Christians. The Qu ar elf (16:103) refutes 
this claim by arguing that a non-Arab could not come up with an eloquent 
Arabic scripture like the Quran when eloquent Arabs failed to produce 
something like it. For more details, see the Introduction. 

729] He forgives those who repent, and gives a grace period to those who do 
not. 

730] ie. a magician, a poet, a fabricator, and a madman. 

731] What they have said about you are only excuses to justify their denial of 
the Hereafter. 

[732] e.g., Jesus and the angels. 

733] Another possible translation: “They will say, ‘Glory be to You! We 
would not dare to take other lords besides You "so how can we claim to 
be lords?”’” 

7341 Another possible translation: “And the angels will say, ‘All good is 
forbidden to you!’” 


735] The good deeds of the disbelievers (like charity) will have no weight on 
Judgment Day. 

736] Some people (like kings and rulers) have some sort of authority in this 
world. But on Judgment Day Allah will be the sole authority. 

737] This passage refers to ’Ogbah ibn Abi-Mu’ait who had initially become 
Muslim, but later left Islam only to please his close friend, Ubai ibn 
Khalaf. 

738] lit., messengers, because denying Noah was equal to denying all of 
Allah’s messengers. 

739] Ar-Rass means “well” or “water-pit”. This refers to a pagan people, 
along with Midian, to whom Allah sent Prophet Shu’aib. 

740] They neither pay attention, nor think for themselves. They only follow 
others blindly. 

741] Generally, animals are obedient and loyal to their masters who care for 
them and they seem to know their way, whereas Meccan pagans are 
disobedient and ungrateful to their Lord and Sustainer, choosing to stray 
from the right path. 

742] This means that one of the great miracles of Allah is that He allows the 
sun to rise in the morning, causing darkness to retreat. He could have 
stopped the sun and the earth from rotating, so half of the world would be 
engulfed in complete darkness, leading to an imbalance in the earth’s 
eco-systems and endangering life on the planet. 

743] This refers to estuaries where salt and fresh waters meet forming 
brackish water. Although both waters mix together, each still keeps its 
distinctive qualities. 

[744] The mixture of sperm and egg. 
[745] See footnote for 7:54. 
[746] The sun. 
747] For example, in retaliation for intentional killing through legal channels. 
748] For killing an Egyptian by mistake before prophethood. See 28:15-17. 
[749] See previous footnote. 
[250] Pharaoh and his soldiers. 
751] Tt is reported in an a thgntic narration collected (eo At-Tirmizi that 


Prophet Muhammad ( K zle) said that Abraham pt le) did not tell the 
I Ie 


full truth only on threé different occasions: when he justified his absence 
from the pagan festival by saying ‘I am really sick’ (see 37:89), and when 
he destroyed the idols and blamed it on the biggest one (see 21:63), and 
when he said that Sarah was his sister to save her from a tyrant ruler. 

7521 On a daily basis, Muslims invoke Allah’s blessings upon ophet 
Muhammad (^ ~) and his family and Prophet Abraham ( . A and 
his family, in hee ligatory and optional prayers. Ie 

753] A pure and sound heart is that of the believer, compared to that of the 
disbeliever and the hypocrite. 

[254] Thlis was the name of Satan before his fall from grace. See footnote for 

2:34. J Pipe 

755] Jit., messengers, because denying Noah (^ =e) was equal to denying 
all of Allah’s messengers. see 

ASIT e pagans were accusing the impoverished believers of following Noah 
( -{<-/<) only for personal gain, not out of sincere faith. 

[z577 1#men of the world. 
[258] T ot’s wife, who betrayed her husband. 

759] Unlike other prophets in this sûrah who are identified as the brothers of 
fellow tribesmen, Shu’aib is not identified as the brother of the people of 
the Aykah (which is the name of the forest where they used to worship a 
particular tree) because they are identified by faith, rather than a tribal 
connection. 

260] They were targeted by scorching heat, so they did not know where to go. 
Finally, a soothing cloud appeared in the sky, so they rushed to it for 
shade, then the cloud rained torment upon them, as they had requested. 

761] i.e., Abdullah ibn Salam, mfeewish authority, who accepted Islam during 
the time of the Prophet ( . 

[762] The devils can no longer’ AE cop on heaven. See 72:8-10. 

763] This refers to fortune-tellers who listen to Satanic whispers, adding more 

lies as they pass on the information to people. 
[2641 Jit., roam aimlessly in every valley. 

765] Jit., information. Moses and his family lost their way in the dark while 
they were travelling from Midian to Egypt. 

266] This refers to the angels who were present around the light. 


767] See footnote for 20:22. 

268] See footnote for 23:45. 

7691 The privilege was their ability to communicate with members of the 
animal kingdom, control the wind, utilize the jinn for their service, etc. 

770) The Queen of Sheba is known iy Iggmic tradition as Bilkis. 

771] She wanted to test Solomon (4: "z ) to see if he was only a king (so he 
would be satisfied with a mine “or a prophet (who would only settle 
with submission to the True God). 

[772] Tf they refuse to submit. 

7731 To explain why Prophet Solomon brought the Queen’s magnificent 
throne and built the marvellous palace, many traditional commentators 
cite some folkloric or legendary stories. However, none of these stories is 
supported by reliable Islamic sources. 

7741 This refers to ’ASif ibn Barkhiya, a knowledgeable and righteous 
assistant of Solomon. 

[775] Because he had refused her tribute. 

776) Bringing her well-guarded, mighty throne all the way from Sheba, 
Yemen. 

[777] i.e., believers and disbelievers. 
[778] ie., the evil. 
[779] i e., the good. 

780] They were struck with famine, which they blamed on Salih and his 
followers. 

781] See footnote for 25:53. 

[782] Via the stars and constellations. 
[783] Th the form of rain. 

784] T lipapassage was revealed when the polytheists asked the Prophet 
( -(<-([<) about the time of the Final Hour. 

785) y. laying their punishment and allowing them time to repent. 

[786] Through their tongues or actions. 

787] The Record refers to the Preserved Tablet (Al-Lawh Al-MahfaZ) in 
which Allah has written the destiny of His entire creation. 

788] The beast is believed to be one of the major signs of the Day of 
Judgment. No further details are given in reliable resources about this 


beast. 

789] To demonstrate His ability to bring people back to life, Allah usually 
refers to some wonders of His creation, such as the planets, the 
alternation of the day and night, the mountains, and the development of 
the human embryo. 

790] The Trumpet will be blown at two different occasions, signalling the 
beginning of Judgment Day. The first blow will cause all creation to die, 
except whoever Allah spares, and the second one will cause them to be 
raised from the dead. 

7911 Tt is commonly believed that Haman was inzghese of architecture during 
the reign of Pharaoh at the time of Moses ( (o £). 

792] The fulfilment of the Pharaoh’s old heart’ his reign would come to 
an end at the hands of a boy from the Children of Israel. 

793] Tn his adulthood, Moses and Pharaoh’s people were not on good terms 
because he started to question their evil practices. 

794] The man assumed that Moses was going to hit him. 

7951 Moses left Egypt with no food, money, or even shoes. He was 
completely worn out by the time he arrived in Midian. After he prayed 
for help, Allah gave him a wife, a job, and a home on the same day. 

796] lit., information. Moses and his family lost their way in the dark while 
they were travelling from Midian to Egypt. 

797] See footnote for 20:22. 

7981 When Moses put his arm through the opening in his collar again, his 
hand returned to its original colour. 

799) The pagans are reminded repeatedly in the Quran that the Prophet 
(-{<-/<) did not witness any of these events that happened centuries 
Nae he was born. For example, the conspiracies that were made against 
Joseph (12:102), the dispute on who should be the guardian of young 
Mary (3:44), and the drowning of Noah’s son in the Flood (11:49). These 
details were not known to Arabs beforg the revelation of the Quran. So 
the only logical way that the Prophet ( .{< zle) knew about these stories is 
through divine revelation. os. ° 

800] So they neglected the Commandments over time. 


801] The pagans of Mecca demanded that the Quran : hpgld have been 
revealed all at once like the Torah, and the Prophet ( .{< zle) should have 
had some tangible signs like the staff of Moses. os. ” 

802] Some Meccan pagans approached some Jewish authorities to inquire 
about the Prophet’s message and they were told that there are references 
of him in the Torah. So the pagans immediately rejected both the Torah 
and the Quran as two works of magic. 

[803] lit., “We had already been Muslims.’ 
[804] By travellers such as the Meccan pagans. 
[805] A prophet. 

806] Korah was the cousin of Moses. Because of Korah’s close association 
with Pharaoh, he became very rich and started to behave arrogantly 
toypids his own people. When he was asked repeatedly by Moses 
(-{<-[<) to pay his alms-tax to help poor Israelites, Korah refused and 
Ciy conspired with a prostitute to damage the reputation of Moses, 
but Moses was cleared of any wrongdoing. 

807] Or: “I have been granted all this because I know that Allah knows I 
deserve it.” 

808] Since their sins are already known to Allah and written in perfect 
records, they will only be interrogated as a form, pL punisiment. 

809] This verse was revealed while the Prophet (~(27],) was on the way to 
Medina, emigrating from Mecca after years of Persecution. Eventually 
the Prophet ( .{< zle) returned to Mecca and the majority of its people 
accepted lane ” 

[810] lit., except His Face. 

[811] Other gods. 

[812] The burdens of those they misled. 
[813] lit., My mercy. 

814] The idolaters tried to burn Abraham because he smashed their idols. See 
21:51-71 for the full story. 

[815] Through honourable mention, righteous family, etc. 

816] Since the angels came in the form of handsome men, Lot was worried 
for the dignity and safety of his guests among his people—not knowing 
that they were angels. 


817] Meccan caravans always passed by these ruins on the way to Yemen and 
Syria for business. 

818] Externally, the web is too flimsy to protect the spider against rain and 
strong wind. Internally, the spider’s family structure is fragile, since some 
species are cannibalistic, with the female preying on the male and the 
young eating their own mother. 

819] They were not convinced of the Quran’s literary miracle and, therefore, 
asked for tangible signs similar to the staff of Moses. 

820] This passage addresses poor Muslims who were subject to persecution in 
Mecca and had to move elsewhere. Some of them were worried that they 
would not find provisions if they moved to a new place. 

821] Mecca was considered as a sanctuary. Therefore, fighting was not 
allowed there, and whoever entered Mecca (especially in the 
neighbourhood of the Ka’bah) was safe—a privilege that other cities in 
Arabia did not have. 

[822] i e., the false gods and idols. 

823] This can also mean “in the lowest part of the earth.” The Dead Sea area 
where this battle reportedly took place is the lowest point on earth, at 400 
meters (1 300 feet) below sea level. NASA: 
www.nasa.gov/multimedia/imagegallery/image_feature_708.html 

824] This verse outlines the times of the five daily prayers. The evening refers 
to Maghrib and ’Ishda' prayers, the morning refers to Fajr, the afternoon 
refers to ’ASr, and noon refers to Zuhr. 

[825] Hope of rain and fear of torment. 
[826] Jit., to Him. 

827] This is from a human perspective. Otherwise, both the creation of the 
universe and the resurrection of humans are easy for Allah. 

8281 The passage says that since humans would not allow those who are 
inferior to them to become their partners in wealth, how can they set up 
helpless partners with Allah in His kingdom? 

[829] Jit., seek the Face of Allah. 

830] Another meaning is the gift given to someone with the intention of 

getting a more expensive gift in return—a common ancient practice. 
[831] lit., grey hair. 


832] Some pagan Arabs used to utilize singing, dancing, chanting, etc. to 
distract people’s attention from listening to the recitation of the Quran. 
833] Luqmân is believed to have been sazrighteous, wise man who lived 

around the time of Prophet David ( (2712). 

834] The Quran usually combines th command to worship Allah with the 
order to honour one’s parents (see 6:151 and 17:23). This is why this 
passage interjects Luqman’s advice to his son. In some instances, the 
Quran follows the order to be kind to parents with emphasizing the role 
of the mother. This is because some of the mother’s sacrifices take place 
before the child is born and when they are too young. So the Quran 
brings these sacrifices to the children’s attention. 

[835] Other gods. 
[836] Satan. 
[8371 See footnote for 6:59. 

838] He knows precisely when, where, and how much rain falls, and whether 
it is going to be drunk by people and animals or used for irrigation, or 
absorbed by the Saft, etc. 

839] The Prophet (%{2 le) was reported in a hadîth collected by Bukhâri and 
Muslim to hav aa “Indeed, the creation of each one of you is brought 
together in the womb of one’s mother as a drop of ‘male and female’ 
discharges for forty days, then one becomes a clinging clot of blood for a 
similar period, then a lump of flesh for a similar period. Then an angel is 
sent to blow the breath of life into the embryo. The angel is then 
commanded to write four things: one’s destined provisions, lifespan, 
actions, and whether one will be happy or miserable "in the Hereafter’.” 

(8401 See footnotg for 7:54. 
[841] Adam Ce 2) 

842] Other "ot è translations: 1. “Do not be in doubt that Moses received 

it.” 2. “Do not be in doubt of your meeting with Moses.” 
[843] i e., prophets. 

844] The passage says that as a person cannot have two hearts, similarly, a 
man cannot have two real mothers, nor can a child have two real fathers. 

845] This divorsp (galled Zihâr) was commonly practiced in Arabia before the 
Prophet ( K zle): If a man declared his wife as unlawful for him as the 


Zahr (back) of his mother, his wife would be divorced. Islam abolished 
this type of divorce (see 58:3-4). 

846] The following distinction should be made: 

1. Sponsorship (which is permissible): a person can sponsor a child 
or host them in their home and care for them as they care for 
their own children, except for legal matters. For example, 
adopted children keep their last names, are allowed to marry the 
children of their adopted parent, adopted and biological children 
of the opposite sex should dress modestly in front of each other, 
and do not have a share in the estate of their adopted parents, but 
can get a share of inheritance (up to one-third of the estate) 
through bequest (waSiyah). 

2. Adoption: a person is not allowed to take an orphan and give 
them his/her last name, give them a share of inheritance similar 
to their own children, etc. 

847] This verse confirms a ruling mentioned in 8:75 which ended a previous 
ruling that allowed inheritance between Muslims from Mecca (AI- 
Muhdjiriin, the Emigrants) and Muslims from Medina (Al-Ansdr, the 
Helpers). Now, only relatives can inherit from one another, whereas non- 
heirs can receive a share through bequest, up to one third of the estate. 
See 4:7, 11-13, 32-33, and 176. 

848] See footnote for 27:75. 

849] In 5 A.H./627 C.E., the Meccan pagans along with some Arab and 
Jewish tribes (totalling aroung) p 000 soldiers) laid a siege around 
Medina, where Ml Prophet (.{2._i) was positioned with 3000 soldiers. 
The Prophet (4147) had aftiċípated the offence and, upon an advice 
from one of hfs ¥@mpanions, dug a trench around the city to protect it 
from invaders. After several unsuccessful attempts to cross the trench, the 
allied enemies quickly lost morale, and were forced to end the siege due 
to severe weather conditions. This encounter is commonly known as the 
Battle of the Trench or the Enemy Alliance. 

[850] The angels. 
[851] lit., from above and below you. 

852] The believers were reassured while the doubts of the hypocrites grew 
more fierce. 


853] Yathyb was the name of Medina before the arrival of the Prophet 


( (2. (<) and Muslim emigrants. 
[854f fil the end of your short life on earth. 
[855] See footnote for 7:46. 

856] The Jews of Banu Quraizah who had violated their treayyLavith the 
Muslims and sided with the enemy alliance. The Prophet ( .{27{<) asked 
how they wished to be judged, and they chose to be judged ag eir book, 
the Torah—in which the penalty for treason is death. 

857] Allah’s revelations refers to verses of the Quran whereas prophigic 
wisdom refers to the sayings and teachings of the Prophet (-{< zle) 
known collectively as hadîth. #5 * 

858] Though Islam and Îmân are sometimes used interchangeably in the 
Quran, Îmân is a higher state of Islam. A Muslim is someone who 
observes the five pillars of Islam, but a believer is someone with strong 
faith, who does everything purely for the sake of Allah, and is mindful of 
Allah in everything they say or do. Every Mu'min (believer/faithful) is a 
Muslim, but not every Muslim is a Mu'min. See 49:14. el tle 

859] Meaning, if Allah makes a ruling in the Quran or the Prophet (~{27/;) 
makes a ruling, then a Muslim is not allowed to seek judigme fife 
anyone else, nor follow their own desires. 

860] This refers to Zaid ibn Hârithah, the Prophet’s adopted son before 
adoption was made unlawful. His wife, Zainab bint Jahsh was from a 
prestigious family. Because Zaid and Zainab came from two different 
social classes, the marriage was not successful. Eventually, Zaid i BIS d 
on divorcing his wife, despite several appeals from the Prophet ( (2712). 
Since one’s adqptgd son was no longer considered to be one’s wir son, 
the Prophet ( - (27 {<) was later allowed to marry Zainab. 

861] Allah’s favéut-to Zaid was to guide him to Islam, and the Prophet’s 
favour Saget free him from slavery. 

862] He (4 (2775) is not the fgsher of Zaid (mentioned in 33:37) or any other 
man. Hie rophet (l3 zle) had three biological sons, who all died in 
childhood. a. . 

[863] Before the marriage is consummated. 

864] Tf divorce is pronounced after the consummation of marriage, a waiting 

period of three months is observed to give the couple a chance to get 


back together and to see if the wife is pregnant (see 65:4). But if the 
divorce happens before the marriage is consummated, then there is no 
waiting period. 

[865] See footnote for 4:3. 

866] This ruling was exclusively for the Prophet (which he never took 
advantage of), but Muslims have to pay a daxytyato their wives. Some 
women did offer themselves to the Prophet ( .{< zle) in marriage, but he 
declined. os. - 

867] The Prophet’s married life can be classified as follows: 

e Until the age of 25: he was single. 

e Age 25 —50: he was married only to Khadijah. 

e Age 50 — 52: he was single after Khadijah’s death. 

e Age 53 — his death at the age of 63: he had a total of ten wives. 
Many of these marriages were to widows (who had been left 
with their children without a provider) and in some cases to 
foster stronger ties with some of his companions and 
neighbouring tribes. Of all the women he married, ’Aishah was 
the only virgin. 

868] Paternal and maternal uncles are similar to the fathers. 

869] By attributing children to Him or associating gods with Him in worship. 

870] By calling him a liar or speaking ill of him and his family. 

[871] By harming them physically or accusing them falsely. 

872] He has forgiven what Muslim women did in the past because they were 
not obligated to cover up. al tbe 

873] This verse is intended to deter the hypocrites. The Prophet (127E) 
never killed any hypocrite as long as they did not join the enemy a ee 
and kill Muslims. 

874] The Quran does not specify how Moses was slandered by some of his 
people. Some narrations suggest that he was either falsely accused of 
adultery (see footnote for 28:76), killing his brother Aaron (who died a 
natural death), or having a skin disease since he, unlike others, used to 
bathe with his clothes on. 

8751 This refers to free choice in shouldering religious commandments. The 
great majority of Allah’s creation (like angels and animals) do not have 
free will. Therefore, they are inherently submissive to Allah. As for 


humans, they rely on their intelligence, and are free to choose between 
guidance and misguidance, and either to adhere to divine obligations and 
prohibitions or not. 

876] This is a guarantee from Allah that if the hypocrites and polytheists ever 
turn to Him in repentance, He is always willing to forgive them. 

877] See footnote for 33:6. sI le 

[878] Which was permissible at the time of Solomon ‘ae zle): 
[879] Which he died while leaning on. #5 ” 
[880] lit., tamarisks. 

[881] Jit., lote trees. 

[882] i e., Mecca and Jerusalem. 

883] They became bored of living comfortably and traveling easily. A similar 
example can be found in 2:61, where the Children of Israel became bored 
with the manna and quails and wanted to eat other things such as onions 
and garlic. 

884] Tblîs was the name of Satan before his fall from grace (see footnote for 
2:34). His assumption (or vow) was that he could easily mislead the 
majority of people (see 7:16-17, 15:39-40, and 38:82-83). 

[885] The believers and polytheists. 
[886] i e., the devils. 


[887] Like the people of Bh rgoh, ’Ad, and Thamûd. 


[888] i e., Muhammad (< A] 
[889] From the place of ret ent to Hell. 


[890] When it is already too late. 
[891] Satan. 
[892] Created your father, Adam, from dust. 
[893] Males and females. 
894] See footnote for 33:6. 
895] This can also mean that they are in awe of their Lord as much in private 
as they are in public. 
[896] This implies Hell and Paradise. 
8971 According to a Prophetic narration collected by Ibn Hibban,: fies total 
A 
number of prophets sent around the world, from Adam ( A zle) to 
Im 


Ape 


Muhammad (1 is 124 000—of which only twenty-five are 
mentioned in the Qura 

[898] i e., the Torah, the d and Psalms. 

[899] See previous footnote. 

[900] The Reminder is another name for the Quran. 

201] See footnote for 35:18. 

902] See footnote for 35:11. 

203] The moon completes a cycle every month (waxing and waning), while 
the sun takes a whole year to complete its cycle (resulting in the spring, 
summer, fall, and winter seasons). 

9041 On the Day of Judgment, the Trumpet will be blown by an angel— 
causing all to die. When it is blown a second time, everyone will be 
raised from the dead for judgment (see 39:68). 

9051 Meaning, We have the ability to turn them into stone or any other 
inanimate object. 

906] Human beings are born weak, then they reach their prime, then they 
grow weak after a certain age. See 30:54. 

[907] Jit., “what Our Own Hands have created.’ 

208] Another meaning is that those idols will be assembled to witness the 
torment of their worshippers on Judgment Day. 

209] The verse refers to two types of Arabian trees, markh and ’afdr, which 
produce fire when their green branches are rubbed together. 

210] i.e., the angels, the a the stars, and the mountains. 

[911] Their father Adam (4 

212] This is when the Tne ‘will be blown the second time. 

213] Other possible translations: 1. “It was you who used to pressure us.” 2. 
“Tt was you who tricked us in the name of the truth.” 3. “It was you who 
dissuaded us from doing good.” 4. “It was you who deceived us with 
false oaths.” 

214] This implies all sorts of delicacies, not just fruits. 

215] Facing each other implies that no one will have anything in their hearts 
against others. 


216] «Bai dun makniin’ can also mean spotless eggs. 


217] Tt is assumed that they will ask each other about their lives in the world 
and what led them to Paradise. al Íz 

218] The pagans of Mecca used to make fun of the Prophet (414 zle) when he 
warned them of this tree. They asked, “How can a tree g owen Hell?” So 
Allah revealed this verse in response. 

[919] i.e., the believers in his family. 
[920] Noah’s sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 

21] His peoples; ifgportedly made decisions based on constellations, so 
Abraham ( .{< le) pretended to do the same to convince them he was not 
able to join at their pagan feast. 

922] See footnote for 26:82. 

923] Allah sent a ram to be sacrificed in place of Ishmael. 

924] The birth of Isaac is announced after the story of sacrifice. So this is a 
proof that the son who was going to be sacrificed was Ishmael, not Isaac. 
This is also supported by 11:71, where Sarah is told that she would give 
birth to Isaac, who would (reach adulthood and) have a son by the name 
of Jacob. 

[925] Abraham or Ishmael. 
[926] | ot’s wife. 
[927] For abandoning his city without Allah’s permission. 

228] Before being swallowed and while inside the whale (see 21:87). The 
lesson is: good deeds are of great help during difficult times. 

[929] The belly of the whale would have become his grave. 

930] The squash plant provided Jonah with shade and repelled harmful 
insects. 

931] Some pagan Arabs believed that the angels were Allah’s daughters. 
Some of them were ashamed to have daughters and took pride in their 
Own sons. 

932] Both sexes are equal before Allah, so the verse questions pagan 
chauvinism. 

933] Or “Yet the jinn know well that they themselves will be brought "for 
judgment’.” This is based on the claim of some pagan Arabs that the 
angels are Allah’s daughters through female jinn. 


934] The “Reminder” mentioned here refers to Scriptures such as the Torah 
and the Gospel. It is commonly used in the Quran as another name for 
Islam’s holy book. 

[935] Jit., when it lands in their courtyards. 

936] The pagans demanded an angel to deliver the message, not a human 
being like themselves. al Íz 

9371 They meant that the Prophet (4{47E) is not concerned with their 
guidance, and that he only wants ig dominance over them. 

938] This refers either to the concept of the Trinity in Christianity or Arab 
polytheistic beliefs. s A 

239] In other words, they do not question the honesty of the Prophet (4 =) 
but question the Quran itself. This verse is similar to 6:33. pa 

240] This verse alludes to the defeat of the Meccan pagans later at Badr. 

[941] į e., pyramids and obelisks. , slde if 


[942] i e., the people of Shu’aib (4 
[943] Brother in faith or ab iner. PE 

244] The verses do not offer a reason why David fe ~(.) asked for Allah’s 
forgiveness. He either did so because he did nét Make himself available 
to judge between people or because he entertained some evil thoughts 
about the two men, thinking they actually came to assassinate him. Still 
he listened to both of them and made a fair judgment. 

2451 Some commentators have a different interpretation, which is not 
supported by reliable sources. They maintain that Solomon kept watching 
these fine horses until the sun set, then he realized that he had missed the 
noon prayer because of his love for horses, so he killed them, striking at 
their legs and necks. 

246] Tt is reported in a Aadith collected by Bukhari that one night Solomon 
said that each of his wives would conceive a boy who would struggle in 
Allah’s cause. He forgot to say ‘Allah willing,” so only one of them gave 
birth to a deformed, dead baby. So Solomon prayed to Allah for 
forgiveness. 

[947] The jinn dived to bring him pearls. 

248] Job was afflicted with losing his children, community, and with a long 

illness. Only his wife stayed with him. He once became angry with his 


wife and vowed to give her one hundred lashes if he recovered. When 
Job’s affliction was lifted, he became remorseful at what he had said. To 
help Job fulfil his vow without harming his wife, Allah ordered him to 
strike her with a bundle of one hundred blades of grass. 

2491 Scholars are in disagreement as to whether Zul-Kifl was a prophet or 
just a righteous man. Those who maintain that he was a prophet identify 
him with various Biblical prophets such as Ezekiel, Isaiah, and Obadiah. 

950] Meaning, they are not welcome since their presence in Hell with us will 
not benefit us in anyway. 

251] In other words, did we underestimate them? 

32] When the angels obeyed Allah’s orders to prostrate before Adam, 
whereas Satan refused to comply. 

[953] See footnote for 2:34. 

9541 The command to bow down was a test of obedience. Satan arrogantly 
rebyseg to comply because he believed he was superior to Adam 
( {2 zle): 

955] (Tse who are devoted to Allah alone and those who associate other 
gods with Him.. {2 

[956] i e., Adam (^ z-o): 
[957] į e., Eve. Ife 

258] The four pairs (males and females), as listed in 6:143-144, are: a pair of 
sheep, a pair of goats, a pair of camels, and a pair of oxen. 

259] The three layers of darkness are: the belly, the womb, and the amniotic 
sac. 

960] This verse can apply to anything that a person listens to, and it can also 
apply specifically to the Quran—meaning, for example, those who read 
verses about retaliation and other verses about forgiveness, then they opt 
for forgiveness. 

31] The slave owned by several quarrelsome masters will always be 
confused because their masters will always give them conflicting orders 
—similarly, one who worships multiple gods will never find peace 
between them. This parable is a logical argument against the existence of 
multiple gods, since each god would try to covet what it created. See 
23:91 for a similar argument. 


[962] Like Korah (see 28:76-81). 

263] No matter how big someone’s sins are, they cannot be bigger than 
Allah’s mercy. Based on 4:48, the only unforgivable sin in Islam is if 
someone dies while disbelieving in Allah or associating others with Him 

Ship. In an authentic narration collected by At-Tirmizi, the Prophet 

le) reports that Almighty Allah says, "O children of Adam! As long 
prr call upon Me, putting your hope in Me, I will forgive you for what 
you have done, and I will not mind. O children of Adam! If your sins 
were to reach the clouds of the sky and then you sought My forgiveness, I 
would ‘still’ forgive you. O children of Adam! If you were to come to Me 
with sins filling the whole world and then you came to Me without 
associating other gods with Me, I would certainly match your sins with 
forgiveness." 

964] Thig gefers to the place where the judgment will be held. The Prophet 
(- (2) is reported in a hadith collected by At-Tabarani to have said, 
“Té“Judgment will be passed on an earth where neither blood has been 
shed nor any sin committed.” 

965] This is emphasized in 21:105. The meaning is that Allah will award 
Paradise to the believers to be its residents forever. Some commentators 
say that the word “inherit” is used because of the understanding that 
when Allah created Paradise and Hell, He made places for all of 
humanity in both. Those who will go to Paradise will inherit the spots of 
the disbelievers who chose misguidance (which leads to Hell), and those 
who will go to Hell will inherit the spots of those who chose guidance 
(which leads to Paradise). 

266] The believers will praise Him for His grace, and the disbelievers will 
praise Him for His justice. 

967] You created us from nothing, then gave us life in the wombs of our 
mothers, then caused us to die at the end of our worldly lives, and finally 
resurrected us after our death (see 2:28). 

968] Tt is reported in a Aadith collected by Imam Muslim that everyone and 
everything that has ever existed will die on that Day, except for Allah— 
the Eternal. He will then ask, “Who does all authority belong to this Day? 
Where are the kings of the world? I am the King.” Since no one will be 


there to answer, Allah will answer Himself, “All authority belongs’ to 
Allah—the One, aide premet 
[969] i e., Moses (6 


270] Meaning, y ae ob ors hegáyse Joseph (6 A died over 400 

hundred years before Moses ( . zle): ie 
[971] See 28:38. Pe 

972] Another possible translation: “Without a doubt, whatever "gods" you are 
calling me to ‘worship’ have no claim ‘to divinity’ in this world or the 
Hereafter.” 

973] The verse does not say “Those in the Fire will cry out to its keepers,” 
simply because there are levels in the Fire: those in higher levels will 
plead to the keepers of the depths of Hell to appeal to Allah to lighten the 
punishment even for one day, since they think they are better than those 
at the bottom. 

[974] ie., the Hellfire. MIE 

375] Like other prophets, Muhammad (%(27|¢) was infallible of sin. The 
verse here refers to misjudgments, such’as the Prophet’s response to the 
blind man (80:1-10), Jonah’s departure from his city without Allah’s 
permission (21:87-88), and David’s suspicions of the two menjjvbo 
scaled the wall of his sanctuary (38:21-25). If the Prophet ( {s 2) 
himself is urged to seek forgiveness, then the believers are even dfe in 
need of praying for Allah’s forgiveness. 

[976] Your father, Adam. 

277] Nutfah refers to the union of male and female gametes (sperm and egg) 
which results in the zygote after fertilization. 

[978] ° Alaqah, meaning the embryo resembles a leech. 
[979] i.e., milk, wool, and hide. 

980] And ridiculed the divine knowledge brought to them by their 
messengers. 

281] These four Days include the first two, so the total period of creation is 
six heavenly Days. 

[982] See footnote for 7:54. 
[983] lit., a bitter and screaming wind. 


984] Tt is reported in Ibn Kathir’s commentary that, on the Day of Judgment, 
the wicked will deny the evil deeds in their records—as a desperate 
attempt to escape the horrible punishment in Hell. They will be asked if 
they accept Allah, the angels, or even their own families and neighbours 
as witnesses, but they will refuse. So Allah will make their organs testify 
against them. 

985] j.e., associating others with Allah in worship and denying the Hereafter. 
See 43:36-37. 

[986] Especially at the time of their death. 
[987] lit., Muslims. 

388] This refers to the noise the disbelievers used to make when the Quran 
was recited (see 41:26), or those who twist the meaning of Quranic 
passages and take them out of context. 

389] The Reminder is one of the names of the Quran. 

990] So they neither hear nor understand the call. 

31] That He will delay their judgment until the Hereafter. 

992] «The Mother of Cities” is an honorary title given to the city of Mecca 
because of its great religious significance as the home of Allah’s first 
house of worship ever built on earth, and perhaps because of its central 
location as well. 

9931 All prophets came with the same message: have faith in one God and do 
good. But each faith-community had their own law. 

994] Like 33:7, this verse names the five greatest prophets of Islam: Noah, 
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad. 

2951 No community split into believers and disbelievers until they received 
the knowledge given by their prophet. 

[996] That He will delay their judgment until the Hereafter. 
[997] i.e., the Jews and Christians. 

298] This could also be a call to all ibglievers to love and respect the 
immediate family of the Prophet ( (%72). 

999] Other possible translations: 1. “ ot will have no refuge then, nor will 
you have an advocate ‘against punishment’.” 2. “You will have no refuge 
then, nor ‘grounds’ to protest ‘the torment’.” 

[1000] They totally deny previous favours. 


1001] This refers to the Preserved Tablet, Al-Lawh Al-Mahfaz, in which 
Allah has written the destiny of His entire creation. 

1002] For example, in the stories of the people of Noah, Lot, Shu’aib and 
other nations that were destroyed, found throughout the Quran. 

1003] For example, male and female, sweet and bitter, day and night, plains 
and mountains, heat and cold, light and darkness. 

1004] See footnote for 37:149. 

[1005] i.e., the birth of a baby girl. 
[1006] See 2:130-132. 

1007] This refers to Mecca and Taif, two cities in Arabia, around 100 km 
apart. 

1008] From a worldly perspective, many people are comforted when they hear 
of others who went through similar trials as them. But this will not be the 
case on Judgment Day. Everyone will be desperate to save themselves 
from the punishment, regardless of others. 

[1009] j @., the hand and the staff (see 20:17-22). 

1010] The torments were: famine, shortage of crops, floods, locusts, lice, 

frogs, and blood (see 7:130-133). 
[1011] See 7:134. 
[1012] Branches of the Nile. 

1013] Moses used to have a speech impediment. But when he became a 
prophet he prayed to Allah to help him speak clearly, and his prayer was 
answered (see 20:25-36). 

1014] When 21:98 was revealed, warning the polytheists that all false gods 
will be in Hell, ’Abdullah ibn Az-4i ipa’ra, a poet who always attacked 
Islam, argued with the Prophet (. bole? that if what the verse says is 
true, then Jesus will be in Hell(a“well! The polytheists, who WS 
present, laughed in agreement with this argument. The Prophet (. ) 
replied that the verse was talking exclusively about idols, nee ten 
Jesus himself did not ask anyone to worship him. Verse 21:101 was later 
revealed in support of the Prophet’s argument. Eventually, Abdullah 
accepted Islam. 

[1015] Or “We could have easily produced angels from you ...” 
[1016] Fruit also implies delicacies. 


[1017] Angel Malik is the chief keeper of Hell. 
[1018] i e., Jesus, Ezra, and the angels. 

1019] The revelation of the Quran started on the 27" night of Ramadan—the 
9th month of the Islamic calendar (see 97:1 and 2:185) 

1020] One of the major signs of the Daj æf Judgment, according to authentic 
narrations from the Prophet ( (%2), is overwhelming smoke. Some 
scholars cite 44:10-11 in ere this apocalyptic sign. However, 44:15 
supports the understanding of this passage as referring to a drought, 
simply because once major apocalyptic signs arrive, no second chances 
will be given. 

1021] This refers to the drought thas affected the Meccan pagans so badly that 
they came to the Prophet ( .{< zle) begging him to pray to Allah to 
remove the affliction from ng ° 

[1022] Meaning, let my people go. 
[1023] i e., Pharaoh and his soldiers. 

1024] Tubba’ Al-Himiari was an ancient righteous Yemeni king whose people 
persisted in disbelief and were destroyed, although they were superior to 
Meccans in strength and manpower. 

1025] Zaqqûm is a tree that grows in the depths of Hell as mentioned in 
37:62-65. The pagans of Mecca used to make fun of the Prophet and say, 
“How can a tree grow in Hell?” 

1026] Abu Jahl, a Meccan pagan leader, met the warning of punishment in the 
Hereafter by exclaiming, “How can I be punished when I am the mighty, 
noble one!” 

[1027] je. rain. 

1028] By sending many prophets, and showing them unique miracles such as 
the splitting of the sea. 

1029] No community split into believers and disbelievers until they received 
the knowledge sive by their prophet. 


[1030] Muhammad (157E). 
1031] This refers to Pa Hab iig Salâm, a Jewish scholar, who embraced 
Islam when the Prophet ( de) emigrated to Medina. 
ms 


[1032] Poor and powerless Masti 


1033] The people of ’Ad were the residents of the hills in the southern part of 

the Arabian Peninsula. 
[1034] The people of Hid. 
[1035] Or never failed in creating them. 

1036] Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad are called the 
Messengers of Firm Resolve. 

[1037] i.e., only for a very short period of time. 
[1038] This passage discusses armed combat in the battlefield only. 

1039] Another possible interpretation: “And those who fight in the cause of 
Allah.” 

1040] Once in Paradise, the believers will recognize their mansions just like 
they recognized their homes in the world. 

1041] Meaning, the disbelievers enjoy their life to the fullest while they are 
heedless of what will happen to them in the Hereafter, just like the cattle 
that graze in the pasture are unaware that they will probably end up in the 
slaughter house. l ve 

1042] The coming of Muhammad (4 {4 =I) is ius of the signs of the Hour. 

1043] Like other prophets, Muha mad Ce i.) was infallible of sin. The 
verse here refers to) Ipdsjudgments, sugh athe example given in 80:1-10. 
If the Prophet ( (%2) himself is urged to seek forgiveness, then the 
believers are evef rere in need of praying for Allah’s forgiveness. 


[1044] As you did before Islam. apy 
[1045] i.e., your opposition to the Prophet (4 {4 zle): 
[1046] See footnote for 47:19. a 


JIZ 

1047] je. that Allah will not support His Prophet tar and that 
misfortune will befall the believers. #5 ” 

1048] Another possible translation: “... so that you all” may believe in Allah 
and His Messenger, support ‘His cause’, revere, and glorify Him morning 
and evening.” 

[1049] See the introduction of this sûrah. 

1050] Those who pledged allegiance at Hudaibiyah were promised by Allah 
that the spoils of war obtained from the Tribe of Khaibar would be 
exclusively theirs. 

[1051] Meaning, you only say so to deprive us of our share. 


1052] This refers to Hawazin and Thaqif, two pagan Arab tribes. 
[1053] The conquest of Khaibar in 7 A.H./628 C.E. 
[1054] Or the spoils of Khaibar. 

1055] Jit., turn their backs. 

1056] A group of Meccans wanted to attack the Muslims on their way to 
Mecca, but were taken captive by the Muslims, then were released. 

10571 The animals that Muslims had brought along to be sacrificed after 
completing the rituals of the minor pilgrimage (’umrah). 

1058] By doing so, the Meccan Muslims who were unknown to their fellow 
believers were safe, along with the pagans who later accepipgdstam. 

1059] This is when the pagans prevented the Prophet (S147) and the 
believers from entering the Sacred House for ’umrah ro e arrogance 
they showed when drafting the peace agreement. 

1060] The declaration of faith that there is only one God to be worshipped and 
that Muhammad (4l 2) is His Messenger. 

1061] The Prophet (<(2777) had a dream that he and his companions were 
going to enter th Sfered Mosque in peace. 

1062] Pilgrims are required to shave or trim their hair upon successfully 
completing the rituals of pilgrimage. 

1063] This refers to the Treaty of Hudaibiyah and/or the gains of Khaibar 
before the fulfilment of the Prophet’s vision to enter Mecca for ’umrah. 
1064] This passage and the next should be understood in their historical 
context. The Muslims were urged to be firm with the Arab pagans and 
their allies who were at war with Muslims at that time. Otherwise, Islam 
encourages the Muslims to treat peaceful non-Muslims with kindness and 

fairness. See 60:8-9. 

1065] Prostration means lying down on one’s face (i.e., touching the ground 
with the forehead and nose while resting on knees and flat palms of both 
hands) as an act of prayer and submission to Allah. 

1066] Jp Deuteronomy 33:1-3, "Moses proclaimed:* “The Lord came from 
Sinai. Rising from Seir upon us, he shone forth from Mount Paran, 
accompanied by a myriad of his holy ones, with flaming fire from his 
right hand for them. Indeed, lover of people, all of his holy ones are in 


your control. They gather at your feet to do as you have instructed. [sic]” 
Paran is a mountain in Mecca. 

1067] In Matthew 13:3-9, “Jesus” spoke many things to them in parables, 
saying, “Behold, the sower went out to sow. ... "A seed’ fell on the good 
soil and yielded a crop, some a hundredfold, some sixty, and some thirty. 
“He who has ears, let him hear.”’ Or the parable of the growing seed in 


Mark 4:26-28. 
[1068] See the first footnote for 48:29. 
1069] There is also a different interpretation: “... nor call him "by his name” as 
you call one another.” In other words, Do not say, ‘O Muhammad.’ 
Rather, say, ‘O Prophet.’ siá 


1070] A group from the tribe of Bani Tamim came to see the Prophet (147E) 
while he was taking a nap in the afternoon. They stood outside th¢ homes 
of his wives and started calling him out loud. al ie 

1071] A]-Walîd ibn ’Uqbah ibn Abi Mu’ait was sent by the Prophet (127) 
to collect alms-tax from Bani Al-Mustalig. They went out to rec¢ivé“Al- 
Walid but he assumed they Syanted to harm him. Therefore, he quickly 
returned to the Prophet ( (4%. |<) with the bad news so he would punish 
them. Shortly after, a delegatton from Bani Al-Mustaliq came to clarify 
the misunderstanding. 

[1072] Or things would have been difficult for you. 

1073] Backbiting people is likened to eating their dead bodies. So if eating 
someone’s flesh iF Kaesang; then backbiting them is no different. 

1074] The Prophet (414 le) is reported in a hadîth collected by Imam Ahmed 
to have said, rat fAfmanity! Your Lord is one, and your ancestry is one. 
No Arab is superior to a non-Arab, nor is any non-Arab superior to any 
Arab. No white is superior to any black, nor is any black superior to any 
white except on account of their righteousness." 

1075] The verse makes a distinction between Islam (the declaration of 
accepting the faith, then performing Islamic duties such as prayers and 
fasting) and Îmân (a higher state of Islam, which means to embrace the 
faith wholeheartedly}. his distinction is very clear in a famous narration 
from the Prophet (.(27([<), commonly known as the Hadith of Gabriel. 

[1076] Or a Record pr serving ‘everything’. 


Í ve 
“MLE 


1077] Meaning, they are confused about the Prophet Heb some say he is 
S 


a poet, some say he is a fabricator, while others ay-he is insane. They 
also rejected the Quran as poetry, magic, or ancient fables. 
1078] Ar-Rass means “well” or “water-pit”. This refers to a \ pagan people, 


along with Midian, to whom; sent Prophet Shu’aib ( (2712). 
[1079] The people of Shu’aib ee Pac 

1080] Tubba’ Al-Himiari was a dacient righteous Yemeni king whose people 
persisted in disbelief and were destroyed, although they were superior to 
the Meccans in strength and manpower. 

1081] The angel to the right records the good deeds of each person, while the 
one to the left records every evil deed. They always accompany the 
person at all times, except when one uses the toilet or is intimate with 
their spouse. 

1082] When a denier dies, they will realize that resurrection, judgment, 
Paradise, and Hell are all true. 

1083] This is the second blow which will cause all to come back to life for 
judgment. 

1084] Meaning, the decree to punish wicked humans and jinn (see 11:119 and 
32:13). 

1085] This can also mean that they are in awe of their Lord as much in private 
as they are in public. 

1086] i e., looking at the Face of the Almighty (see 10:26 and 75:22-23). 

[1087] See footnote for 7:54. 

1088] Some scholars believe this verse comes in response to Exodus 31:17, 
which says, “The Lord made the heavens and the earth in six days, but on 
the seventh day He rested and was refreshed.” 

[1089] This verse refers to the times of the five daily prayers. 
[1090] See footnote for 50:20. 
[1091] Or “By the heavens with their marvellous orbits.” 

1092] See footnote for 50:5. 

1093] Other possible translations: 1. “... by which the deluded are turned 
away.” 2. “Whoever is turned away from it is "truly’ deluded.” 

1094] Optional prayers before dawn are recommended, and are more likely to 


be accepted. . 
4L 


1095] Abraham (TS) did not want his guests to know that he was going to 
prepare a meee them so they would not ask him not to. 

1096] As mentioned in 11:69-70, the angels came to Abraham in the form of 
men and when he offered them food, they did not eat. In ancient Middle 
Eastern culture, if a guest refused to eat the food provided by their host, it 
was a sign of ill-will [2 

as Prophet laac ( -[a_ [5). 

[1098] Lot (£T) afd fis two daughters. 
[1099] The aineof Sodom. 

[1100] Because of his arrogance and disbelief. 

1101] jit, ‘a barren wind,’ since the wind was not productive—it did not carry 
rain or fertilize trees. 

1102] Meaning, you have only three days to live. See 11:65. 

11031 The globe was spread out to accommodate Allah’s creation. The 
spherical shape of the earth is expressed in 39:5. 

1104] For example, male and female, sweet and bitter, day and night, plains 
and mountains, heat and cold, light and darkness. 

1105] Since you have alyeegy delivered the message clearly. 

1106] Where Moses ee zle) communicated with Allah. 

[1107] i e., the Onan - 

1108] This is either the Sacred House in Mecca, which is frequented by 
pilgrims, or a sanctuary in Heaven, which is frequented by angels. 

1109] The seas and oceans will be on fire on Judgment Day. 

1110] One gets the reward for being patient in difficult times in this world. As 
for the Hereafter, those who suffer patiently in Hell will not be rewarded 
for their patience. 

1111] Meaning, no one will carry the burden of another’s sins. 

1112] Tt is assumed that they will ask each other about their lives in the world 
and what led them to Paradise. 

1113] The pagan leaders claimed to be Mecca’s most intelligent minds. Spfis 
verse questions their intelligence, arguing that the Prophet (.[< zle) 
cannot be a madman and a poet at the same time. #5 ” 

1114] Arab pagans were challenged in the Quran to produce its equivalent 
(52:34), or ten sûrahs (11:13), or at least one sûrah (2:23), but the 


challenge has never been met. 

1115] See footnote for 37:149. 

116] i.e., famine, droughts, or the defeat at the Battle of Badr (see 32:21). 
The Battle of Badr took place in the 15" year of the Prophet’s mission. 
The previous passage poses fifteen questions to the Meccan pagans 


bef ing them jin, thi ; 
efore warning emg this passage 


[1117] Muhammad (6147). 
[1118] The angel Gala 

1119] Gabriel Lupa to come to the Prophet in a human form. But he appeared 
to him (.{< zle) twice in his angelic form: once at the beginning of the 
Prophet’ ssion (wh nighe angel manifested himself, filling the 
horizon, the Prophet ( .{%_{2) lost his consciousness), and another time 
during the Prophet’s Nd foumney to the seventh heaven to receive the 
order to pray directly from Allah (see 17:1). 

[1120] lit., he was only two bow-draws away. 

1121] The Prophet was taken to heaven to see some of Allah’s magnificent 

signs. He only saw what he was told to see. 
[1122] See footnote for 52:39. 

1123] Meaning, “You call them gods while in fact they are not gods.” 

1124] Arab pagans took these idols as intermediaries to intercede for them on 
the Day of Judgment (see 39:3) 

[1125] i e., the Quran. 

[1126] į e., Paradise. 

[1127] ie., your father, Adam. 
[1128] See footnote for 31:34. 

1129] This passage refers to Al-Walid ibn Al-Mughirah who initially accepted 
Islam, and then a man persuaded him to leave Islam, promising to be 
punished in his place in the Hereafter for a small fee in this world. 
Initially, Al-Walid paid him some of the amount they had agreed upon 
then refused to pay the rest. 

[1130] Jit., laughter and weeping. 
[1131] A star worshipped by some ancient pagans. 
[1132] A]so known as the second ’Ad. 
1133] The stones of baked clay that were rained upon them (see 11:82-83). 


1134] The Meccan pagans challenged the Prophet eae to have the moon 


split in two if he wanted them to believe in him( Pie moon was split, and 
then re-joined, as reported by several eyewitnesses, but still the pagans 
refused to believe, calling this miracle “sheer magic.” 

1135] miracle (usually referred to as a ‘sign’ in the Quran) can be defined 
as an extraordinary event manifesting divine intervention in human 
affairs. Every prophe} Shas given miracles to prove he was commissioned 
by Allah. Moses; Aa zde) was given the miracle of the staff and many 
others. Jesus ( . {3 A gave life to the dead and healed the blind and the 

“A 


leper. And M \afmad ep received the Quran, a literary miy che, 


to challenge the master rabic eloquence. The Prophet (.{27 |<) 
performed some other miracles such as splitting the moon, mul ip ying 
food and water, and healing some of his companions. 

1136] Angel Israfil will blow the Trumpet, causing all to be raised from the 
dead for judgment. 

[1137] i.e., the Judgment. 

[1138] The Flood or the Ark. 

[1139] lit., a bitter and screaming wind. 

[1140] Who came in the form of handsome men. 

[1141] This was later fulfilled in the Battle of Badr. 

[1142] Sagar is one of the names of Hell. 

[1143] To bring anything into being. 

[1144] “Bel” And it is! 

[1145] Rivers of water, milk, honey, and wine. See 47:15. 
[1146] Jit., prostrate. 

1147] This question is repeated thirty-one times in this sûrah: eight times after 
reminders of Allah’s favours, seven times in the passage talking about the 
punishment of the deniers of judgment (which is the number of the gates 
of Hell), and eight times in each of the two following passages talking 
about Paradise, which has eight gates. 

1148] The two points of sunrise and sunset in the summer and the winter. 

1149] See footnote for 25:53. 

[1150] lit., your Lord’s Face. 


1151] Death is listed as one of Allah’s favours since it puts an end to tyrants, 
ends the suffering of the oppressed, makes all people equal, ushers in 
judgment and the enforcement of justice, and leads the believers to 
eternal joy and peace in Paradise. 

1152] Giving life and causing death, making some rich and others poor, 
elevating some and debasing others, etc. 

1153] According to the next three passages (as well as the next sûrah), people 
will be divided into three groups on Judgment Day: 

1. The foremost: the righteous who are always ahead of others in 
faith and goodness. 

2. The people of the right: the average believers who will receive 
their records of deeds with their right hands. 

3. The people of the left: the disbelievers who will receive their 
records with their left hands. 

1154] Since their sins are already known to Allah and written in perfect 
records, they will only be interrogated as a form of punishment. 

1155] Waring of the punishment in Hell is listed as a favour just like the 
promise of the reward in Paradise. Think of this as a road sign: the latter 
is like a sign about food, gas, etc., and the former is like a cautionary sign 
about an accident ahead or something hazardous. Both signs benefit 
people. 

[1156] Before these righteous servants in Paradise. 

1157] See footnote for verses 31-45 in the previous sûrah. 

1158] Unlike this world of sheer injustice, the Hereafter will put everyone in 
their right place. The righteous will be elevated in Paradise, while the 
wicked will be humiliated in Hell. 

1159] Another possible translation: “only exchanging greetings of peace.” 

1160] je, associating others with Allah in worship and denying the 
resurrection and judgment. 

L161] See footnote for 44:43. 

1162] This verse refers to two types of Arabian trees, markh and ’afâr, which 
produce fire when their green branches are rubbed together. 

[1163] See 43:4. 


1164] This verse refutes the pagan claim that the Quran was sent down by 
devils (see 26:210-212). Based on this verse, many jurists maintain that a 
Muslim should perform ablutions before reading the Quran. 

1165] Some pagans believed that rain was caused by some stars. 

1166] lit., fragrant basil. Throughout the Quran, Paradise is described as being 
pleasant to the eye, the heart, and the ear. This verse emphasizes the scent 
as well. 

1167] Another possible translation: “the Manifest "through His signs” and the 
Hidden ‘from His creation’.” 

[1168] See footnote for 7:54. 
[1169] By His knowledge. 
[1170] See 7:172. 

1171] Prior to the victory over Mecca, Muslims were outnumbered and 
perceived as weak. Once Mecca surrendered to the Muslims, many tribes 
either accepted Islam or made peace agreements with the Muslim victors. 
Therefore, the believers who donated and strived at the time of hardship 
and weakness deserve more rewards than those who did so at the time of 
ease and prominence. 

[1172] i e., Paradise. 
173] This wall is said to be the barrier of Al-A’rdf (or the heights) between 
Paradise and Hell. See 7:46-49. 
[1174] Satan. 
[1175] So it is easy for Him to soften your hearts as well. 
[1176] i e., Paradise. 
[1177] By His knowledge. 

1178] Sørg Jews used to play with words when they addressed the Prophet 

( (212) to ridicule him, saying for example ‘AsGmu ’alaikum’ (death be 
o you) instead of ‘Asaldmu ’alaikum’ (peace be upon you)—which is 
the greeting of Islam, inspired by Allah. p A 

11791 Some companions used to ask the Prophet (6 ) unnecessary and 
sometimes meaningless questions. For coh ee nae fathers were, 
where their lost animals were, and what they had in their pockets. Some 
would ask for new rulings that would probably make things difficult for 
some Muslims or even themselves. So this verse was revealed to cut 


down such practice. Eventually, the ruling was lifted in order not to make 
it difficult for people with good questions, who could not afford to give a 
charity. 

[1180] Spirit here canman revelation, light, or help. 

1181] The Prophet Cr "{,) allowed Banu An-Nadir to carry whatever they 
could on their Catffels, so they removed the wooden pillars of their 
homes, causing theme collapse. 

1182] The Prophet toa j j 

phet (. ‘16 had instructed the Muslim army not to cut down 
trees, but some fae had to remove some palm trees to be able to enter 
the fort, to the dismay of Banu An-Nadir. When Muslims disagreed on 
that act, this verse was revealed. 

1183] The verses here talk about the distribution of gains acquired without 
fighting. These gains are mostly distributed among the poor and the 
needy. As for the spoils of war, four-fifths of the spoils are distributed 
among the fighters. See 8:41. 

[11841 Commonly known as Al-Ansar (or the Helpers). 
[1185] Meaning, Banu An-Nadir. 

1186] This either refers to the defeat of the Meccan pagans at the Battle of 

Badr or the exile of Banu Qainuqa’. 
[1187] See 14:22. 
[1188] i e., the Hereafter. 

1189] Meaning, that the hearts of the disbelievers are harder than the 
mountains concerning the Quran. 

1190] Jąbbâr comes from the root word ja-ba-ra which means to impose, 
support, or console. For example, Jabirah means the cast that supports a 
broken bone. Hence, Allah is the One Whose Will cannot be resisted, and 
Who comforts those who are broken or oppressed. 

[1191] lit., come out "of Mecca’. 

1192] According to the Treaty of Hudaibiyah (see footnote for 48:1-3), 
Muslims who chose to move to Mecca would not be returned to Muslims 
in Medina, and Meccan pagans who accepted Islam and chose to move to 
Medina would be returned to Mecca (except for women). 

1193] Those who moved to Mecca to marry pagans. 


1194] Jit., nor come up with a falsehood they have forged between their own 
hands and legs. nee 

11951 Some companions desperately asked the Prophet et "iz) about the 
best deeds. When he told them that one of the best ae sis to fight in 
self-defence, they pledged to do so. But when the order came to fight the 
Meccan pagans, some either did not comply or fled in Salika Uhud. 

1196] Ahmad is another name for Prophet Muhammad (~(27]). Both are 
derived from ha-ma-da which means ‘praise.’ Some( Mislim scholars 
believe this verse refers to John 14:16, where Jesus says: “And I will ask 
the Father, and he will give you another periklytos, to be with you 
forever.” Periklytos is a Greek worgi tbat means ‘the praised one.’ The 
name of Prophet Muhammad (.{27;2) appears several times in the 
Gospel of Barnabas, which i med apocryphal by Christian 
authorities. 

1197] Submission to Allah means ‘Islam’ in Arabic. 

1198] Some Jews used to boast that they were Allah’s most beloved and that 
they had been favoured with the Torah and the Sabbath, so the three 
following passages came in response: 

1. What is the benefit of the Torah if it is not followed properly 
(62:5)? 

2. If you are truly Allah’s favourite servants then you should wish 
to meet Him (62:-6-8). 

3. Muslims have been blessed with Friday, equivalent to the 
Sabbath (62:9-10). 

1199] Meaning, they can carry the physical burden of the books, but not 
understand a word of them. 

1200] j e., disobeying Allah, killing some of the prophets (including Zachariah 
and John the Baptist), claiming to have killed Jesus, accusing Mary of 
adultery, and dealing with usury. See 4:153-158. 

1201] Initially, the Friday congregational prayer was performed first, followed 
by the sermon. On one occasion, a caravan of fö arrived in Medina 
during a time of hardship while the Prophet ( (%72) was on the pulpit. 
Following ancient traditions, the caravan was received with drum-beats. 
Most congregants rushed to receive the caravan, leaving the Prophet 


Ape 


CEE) in the middle of the sermon. Henceforth, the sermon was given 
first 3o everyone would stay for the prayer. 

1202] This passage and the next refer to “Abdullah ibn Ubai, the chief 
hypocrite in Medina. 

[1203] je. the Quran. 

1204] This verse was revealed when some early Muslims were prevented from 
emigrating to Medina 1 byt eir own spouses and children, so they could 
not join the Prophet ( .{< zle) and the rest of the believers to practice their 
faith freely. a s 

1205] Meaning, when a husband intends to divorce his wife—after the 
consummation of marriage—he should divorce her outside her monthly 
cycle, provided that he has not touched her after her period. This makes it 
easy for the wife to observe her ’iddah (waiting period for around three 
months, see 65:4). Otherwise, things will be complicated for her. For 
example, if divorce happens after sexual intercourse, she might get 
pregnant, which delays the end of ’iddah until the end of her pregnancy. 
If divorce happens during a monthly cycle, scholars are in disagreement 
as to whether the divorce counts or not. If it does not, she has to wait 
until her menstruation is over to see if her husband still wants to divorce 
her. 

1206] Perhaps the husband who has divorced his wife may change his mind 
and restore the marriage before the end of her waiting period (after the 
first or second count of revocable divorce). 

1207] A husband may separate from his wife after each of the first two counts 
of divorce or at the end of her waiting period with dignity. If he chooses 
to stay with her after the first two counts of divorce then divorces her a 
third time, the marriage is terminated at the end of her third waiting 
period. The wife will have to marry and divorce another man before she 
can be remarried to her ex-husband (see 2:230). However, a woman 
marrying someone with the intention of getting divorced, in order to 
return to her first husband, is forbidden. 

1208] This applies to pregnant women who are divorced or widowed. 

[1209] After the divorce is finalized. 
[1210] This is one of the names of the Quran. 
[1211] See 5:89. 


1212] Both wives were disbelievers. Noah’s wife used to give away the 
identity of the new believers so the disbelievers could persecute them. 
And Lot’s wife used to tell the men about her husband’s handsome male 
visitors so they could approach them. 

1242) Gabriel /igathed into the sleeves of Mary’s garment so she conceived 


Jesus ( . {3 zle): 

= some aa point to birth defects, genetic mutations, etc. and say these 
are flaws. This verse means that, in the grand scheme of creation, 
everything created has its place, form, and purpose, and that it does 
exactly what Allah ordained for it. 

[1215] See 72:8-10. 

1216] This can also mean that they are in awe of their Lord as much in private 
as they are in public. 

1217] Another possible translation: “This is what you were calling for.” 

1218] Meaning, whether Allah takes our lives (as you wish) or grants us a 
long life, it is all good for us. But who will protect you from Allah if you 
disbelieve in Him. 

1219] Like 53:33-35 and 74:11-26, these verses refer to Al-Walîd ibn Al- 


Mughirah, a | of the Meccan opposition against Islam. He rejected 
the Prophet ( .{<- |<) as a madman, so the Quran responded by listing ten 


of his qualiti¢s?“two of which were unknown to him: the fact that he was 


born out of wedlock and that his nose would be chopped off several years 
later at the Battle of Badr. At least three of his ten sons accepted Islam— 
including Khalid ibn Al-Walid. 

1220] This is the story of a righteous man who owned a garden and used to 
give a Share of the harvest to the poor. Following his death, his children 
decided to keep all the produce for themselves and give nothing to the 
poor. 

1221] Another possible translation: “... without leaving some for the poor.” 

1222] Tt is believed that Allah accepted their repentance and replaced their 
garden with a better one. 

[1223] i.e., if only the Meccan pagans knew. 

1224] Like the Face and the Hands, the Shin is believed by many to be one of 

the qualities of Allah, in a way befitting His Majesty and Greatness. 


Since baring the shin in the Arab culture is associated with the heat of 
battle, some interpret the verse metaphorically, so the meaning would be: 
“Beware of’ the Day when horror sets in.” 

[1225] While inside the whale. See 21:87 and 37:139-148. 

[1226] This is one of the names of the Quran. 

[1227] The Striking Disaster is another name for the Day of Judgment. 

[1228] i e., your ancestors. 

1229] According to 8:32, An-Nadr ibn Al-Harith challenged Allah, saying, “If 
this is indeed the truth from You, then rain down stones upon us from the 
sky or overcome us with a painful punishment.” 

[1230] The holy spirit is the angel Gabriel. 

1231] Jydgment Day will seem like 50 000 years for a disbeliever, bytiip will 
seem like a very short period for a believer. The Prophet ( {7 2) is 
reported in a hadith collected by Imam Ahmed to have said toe the 
believer, this long period will be like the time they took to perform a 
single prayer in the world. 

1232] Jit., private parts. 

[1233] See footnote for 4:3. uf le 

1234] Some Meccan pagans used to gather around the Prophet at le) to 
mock him and the believers, saying that if there is in fact iether 
they are better entitled to Paradise than the poor believers. 

[1235] i.e., from a humble fluid. See 32:8. 

1236] The daily points of sunrise and sunset, caused by the earth’s rotation 
around its own axis. 

[1237] Oy “... as if rushing towards a target.” 

1238] Meaning, it is out of Allah’s mercy that He does not hasten your 
punishment but allows you more time to repent. 

[1239] See 22:5 and 23:12-14. 

1240] i e., your father Adam, who was created from clay. 

1241] These are the names of their main idols. Initially, these idols had been 
erected to commemorate some righteous people before the time of Noah. 
After many generations, however, the idols were taken as objects of 
worship. 


i} 72 
AN Le 


1242] Noah (len) prayed for his people’s destruction after Allah revealed 


to him tht 46 one else was going to believe. See 11:36. 

1243] Meaning, evil jinn tempted some pagan Arabs to believe that the angels 

are Allah’s daughters through female jinn. 
[1244] See footnote for 6:128. 

1245] Some jinn used to eavesdrop on the heaven, then pass on what they 
heard to fortupé-tellers. But this practice came to an end once 
Muhammad ( (2712) was sent as a messenger with the Quran. 

1246] Meaning, t se if they will be grateful to Allah for rain and other 


provisions. nee 
Aad 
S 


I 
[1247] ie., Muhammad (4 dE 

1248] This passage inet fad ruling mentioned in 73:2-4. So from now on, 
the believers do not have to stick to any of the portions specified at the 
beginning of this sûrah. Rather, they can pray whatever they can at night. 

[1249] i.e., giving for charity and good causes. 

1250] The reward for your charity will be far better than what you left behind 
or what you have given in charity because it will be rewarded ten-fold, or 
even 700-fold, and Allah gives more to whoever He wills. See 2:261. 

1251] Tt was a common practice to give someone a gift, hoping to receive a 
more valuable gift in return. This practice is disliked in Islam. 

1252] This is when the Trumpet will be blown for the second time, causing 
everyone to rise from the dead for judgment. See 39:68. 

1253] This refers to Al-Walid ibn Al-Mughirah, a leader of Meccan 
opposition against Islam. See footnote for 64:10-16. 

1254] Another possible translation: “It spares none poe leaves nothing.” 

1255] Some pagans made fun of the Prophet est "i) when they were told 
that the keepers of Hell are nineteen ingels CH of them said mockingly 
to other pagans, “You take care of two angels and I will vanquish the rest 
all by myself.” 

1256] Another possible translation: “In fact, each of them wishes to be given a 
scripture open ‘for all to read’.” See 6:124. 

1257] This refers to the fact that every human has a unique set of fingerprints. 

[1258] They both will rise from the west and lose their light. 
[1259] Their organs will testify against them. See 41:19-24. 


1260] » alaqah, meaning the embryo resembles a leech. 


1261] This is the time before a human comes into being and as an embryo. 

1262] The mixture of male and female gametes (sperm and egg) which form 
the zygote after fertilization. 

1263] There will be no day or night, sun or moon, winter or summer in 
Paradise. It will always be bright and temperate. 

1264] The word tahtir implies that once the believers take that pure drink, 
there will be no bad feelings in their hearts or ailments in their bodies. 
1265] This verse refers to the five daily prayers: the dawn prayer, then noon 

and afternoon prayers, then sunset and late evening prayers, respectively. 

1266] Extra prayers offered at night. See 73:20. 

[1267] See 23:12-14 and 22:5. 

1268] lit., yellow camels. Black camels’ hair glistens yellow in sunlight. 

1269] The pagans used to mock the teachings of the Quran (e.g., resurrection 
and judgment). They disagreed whether the Quran was magic, poetry, or 
fortune-telling. 

1270] Just like tent pegs and icebergs, mountains go deep below the surface, 
slowing tectonic movement. 

[1271] j e., the angel Gabriel. 

1272] In the Hereafter, Allah will judge between all of His creation including 
animals, which will eventually become dust. The wicked will wish that 
they too were turned into dust so they do not have to go to the Fire, as 
reported in an authentic narration collected by Al-Hakim. 

1273] The first Blast will cause everyone to die except those spared by Allah. 
Then the second one will cause the dead to come to life for judgment. See 
39:68. 

1274] The staff turning into a snake. See 20:17-23. 

1275] This is from a human perspective. Otherwise, both the creation of the 
universe and the resurrection of humans are easy for Allah. 

1276] The Arabic verb daha also suggests that the earth is egg-shaped. The 
noun form dihya is still used in some Arab dialects to mean an egg. 
Based on 2:29, 41:9-12, and 79:27-33, Allah ordained both realms, then 
formed the earth and created its provisions, then formed the heaven into 
seven heavens—all in six "heavenly' Days. See footnote for 7:54. 


1277] This is the second Blast which will cause the dead to come to life for 
judgment. See 39:68. 

1278] Another possible translation: “What is this question? You "O Prophet” 
are one of its signs.” Ty js[pelieved—based on authentic narrations from 
the Prophet—that he ( .(27/-) is one of the signs of the Day of Judgment. 

1279] This passage along with others that are critical of some thi p[the 
Prophet ( .{< le) did (such as 66:1), proves that the Prophet ( .[< le) 
delivered AEE ctations in all honesty. as ” 

1280] The way to true guidance or the way out of their mothers’ wombs. 

1281] Burial is perceived as a way of honouring human beings after their 
death. 

1282] This is the second Blast which will cause the dead to come to life for 
judgment. See 39:68. 

1283] Ten-month pregnant camels were the most precious thing for nomadic 
Arabs. These camels were always cared for and treasured. 

1284] AJl animals will be brought together for judgment and then they will be 
reduced to dust. 

1285] On the Day of Judgment the oceans and seas will be on fire. 

1286] Some pagan Arabs used to bury their infant daughters alive for fear of 
shame or poverty. This practice was condemned and abolished by Islam. 
See 16:58-59. 

1287] This probably refers to black holes. Kanasa means to sweep or hide. 
Miknasah is derived from this, and is the standard word for a vacuum 
cleaner. 

_ lit, the day as it takes first breath. 
+2931 i e., Muhammad ( (2772). re 

1290] This is first time th Prophet ( (212) saw Gabriel in his angelic form. 
He saw him a second time in he vefr during the Night Journey. See 53:5- 
15. 

[1291] See 26:210-212. 

1292] Sijjin is the name of a place (such as a confinement) in the depths of 
Hell. 

1293] This is based on the commentary of Ibn Kathir. 

[1294] > T]]iytin is an elevated place in Paradise. 


[1295] i e., treasures and dead bodies. 

1296] You will pass from life to death and from death to resurrection, from 
well-being to sickness and from sickness to well-being, from poverty to 
richness and from richness to poverty, etc. 

[1297] Jit., they do not prostrate. 

1298] The witness can be Allah, the angels, or the prophets, and the witnessed 
can be the people standing for judgment or the overwhelming events of 
Judgment Day. 

1299] Testes and ovaries are formed in the abdomen of the fetus during the 
first weeks of pregnancy, before descending to their permanent place in 
the pelvis. Both are sustained by arteries originating between the 
backbone and the ribcage. 

1300] Meaning, We will have you memorize the revelations and apply the 
rulings contained in them, unless one ruling is replaced by another. 

1301] The Islamic way of life which brings about ease in this life and 
salvation in the next. 

1302] Another possible translation: “Do they not ever reflect on rainclouds— 
how they are formed?” 

1303] With the exception of some mountains and hills in some parts of the 
world, the earth has been smoothed out, making it easy for people to live, 
farm, and travel. 

1304] The Hellfire is the major punishment. The minor punishment includes 
disasters in this life as well as torments in the grave. See 32:21. 

1305] Like many sûrahs, this one begins with an oath from Allah. He has the 
right to swear by any object of His creation (i.e., the sun, the moon, the 
stars, the dawn, or the angels). As for us, we are only allowed to swear by 
Allah alone. 

1306] This refers to the first ten days of the month of Zul-Hijjah, in which the 
rituals of pilgrimage are performed. 

[1307] i e., pyramids and obelisks. 

1308] lit., so your Lord poured on them a whip of punishment. 

1309] They take over the inheritance of orphans and women. 

1310] Another possible translation: “None has ever punished the way He will 
punish on that Day, nor has anyone bound the way He will bind.” 


1311] Other sûrahs describing the people of the right and the people of the left 
include 56 and 69. 

[1312] Or “... when it reflects the sun’s light.” 

1313] Tt is true that while Qudar ibn Sâlif was the individual who killed the 
camel, the rest of the people were supportive of what he did, so they were 
all punished collectively. 

1314] And, by extension, anyone asking for help. 

1315] The Prophet’s name is always mentioned in the call to prayer, along 
with Allah’s Name. Close to the end of each of the five » aly prayers, 
worshippers invoke Allah’s blessings upon the Prophet ( .{27(<) and his 
family. When someone reverts to Islam, they testify hfk ah is their 
Lord and Muhammad is His Messønggr. Muslims, even those who are 
not practicing, love the Prophet ( . {4 le) and many name their children 
after him. os. w 

1316] Tf a definite noun is repeated in Arabic, it means that we are referring to 
the same thing. For example, “I met the man and I gave the man some 
money.” But if an indefinite noun is repeated, it means we are referring to 
two different things. For example, “I met a man and I gave a man some 
money.” With this in mind, we realize that 94:5-6 refers to one hardship 
(a definite noun) and two different eases (an indefinite noun). Hence, the 
Arabic saying: “Two eases cannot be overcome by one hardship.” el ME 


1317] This passage refers to the land of figs and olives where Jesus ( are 
alt: and 


lived, Mount Sinai where Moses ( .{z- |<) pim unicated with Al 
the city of Mecca where the rene “ 


(-{2-[-;) started his mission. A 
similar reference can be found in Bef eronomy 33:1, "Moses 
proclaimed:* “The Lord came from Sinai. Rising from Seir upon us, he 
[sic] shone forth from Mount Paran.” Seir is a mountain near Jerusalem, 
and Paran is a mountain near Mecca. 

1318] The New American Standard Bible, copyright © 1960-1995 by the 
Lockman Foundation. 

1319] ° Alaq, meaning the embryo resembles a leech. 

1320] Abu Jahl was a staunch leader of the Meccan opposition igglslam. There 
are many authentic stories of his abuse of the Prophet ( . (27 2). 

1321] This refers to the frontal lobe of the brain, w ele reasoning is 
processed. 


1322] Tt is also believed that the angels descend with all decreed matters for 
the whole year during that night (al-qadr also means ordainment or 
destiny). 

[1323] i.e., the angel Gabriel. 

1324] lit., burdens (i.e., treasures and dead bodies). 

1325] The believers will head to Paradise and the disbelievers will head to 
Hell. 

1326] Jit., visited the graves, since the stay in the grave is brief, followed by 
eternal life either in Paradise or Hell. 

1327] Other possible translations: 1. “The Fire will be in towering columns.” 
2. “They will be tied to long pillars.” 

[1328] Or worm-eaten leaves. 

1329] Quraysh is another name for the people of Mecca. 

1330] Blessing the people of Quraysh with provision and security is probably 
the answer to Abraham’s prayer in 14:35-37. 

1331] They refuse to help others with small things like salt or water, let alone 
alms-tax. 

1332] This includes a heavenly river as well other favours in both worlds. 

1333] Since she usgellig carry thorny branches and throw them in the way of 
the Prophet ( (27 |<), she will be carrying firewood in Hell. 

1334] This wag Ofte of the earliest sûrahs revealed of the Quran. 
Paradoxically, for Abu Lahab to disprove the Quran, all he had to do was 
accept Islam because this verse condemns him to Hell. 

1335] As mentioned in the Introduction, the Quran has three main themes: 1. 
Stories. 2. Muslim teachings. 3. And belief in je,unseen. Since Sirah 
112 covers the third theme, the Prophet (.{< le) says in a hadîth 
collected by Bukhâri and Muslim that reading sûrah equals reading 


one third of the Quran. 


